# Preface

The classical economists treated land as distinct from capital: "land,
labour and capital" were the three basic "factors of production". They
were mutually exclusive. They were comprehensive, including all economic
agents. Each was also "limitational," meaning at least some of each was
needed for all economic activity (v. A9, below).\[1\] They made a
coherent system.

Neo-classical economists denied the distinction and undertook to purge
land from economese. Many of them, following John B. Clark and Frank
Knight, still deny the distinction as I explain in *The Corruption of
Economics*, a companion volume in this series. Many treat the matter by
seizing on and stressing all similarities of land and capital, while
ignoring all differences. Some invent gray areas that seem to fuse land
and capital, present them as typical, and quickly move on. Many more
simply ignore land, which has the effect of accepting the Clark-Knight
verdict in practice. Others uneasily finesse and blur the issue by
writing "land" in quotes, or trivializing its value, or referring
vaguely to "quasi-rents" to comprehend a broad spectrum of incomes both
from land and other factors.

Whatever possessed the neo-classicals to leave such a mess? One needs to
know something of their times and politics. J.B. Clark and E.R.A.
Seligman of Columbia University were obsessed with deflecting proposals,
strongly supported at the time and place they wrote, to focus taxation
on land. Henry George, after all, was nearly elected Mayor of New York
City in 1886 and 1897. Frank Knight, founder of The Chicago School,
followed them closely. That explains why some of the points made herein
may seem obvious to readers who have been spared the formal conditioning
imposed on graduate students in economics. In graduate training,
however, the obvious is obscured, silenced, or denied. Hundreds of books
on economic theory are published with "land" absent from the index.
Denial is reinforced by dominant figures using sophistical, pedantic
cant, which students learn to ape to distinguish themselves from the
laity and advance their careers.\[2\]

The dominance of "fusers" is shown by the prevalence of 2-factor models,
wherein the world is divided intojust labour and capital.\[3\] Land is
melded with capital, and simply disappears as a separate category, along
with its distinctive attributes. A number of economists don’t buy it,
but don’t do anything about it - acquiescing in error by silence,
indifference, passivity, or anxiety of the professional consequences.
They handle the question by "going into denial," as it were, resolving a
vexing issue by pretending it isn’t there. Truth will not be made
manifest by hedging, especially against such motivated forces as have an
interest in hiding unearned wealth behind the skirts of capital.

The market exchange of capital for land causes an elementary failure in
the minds of many. Land and capital each have their prices and may be
bought and sold for money. Each alike is part of an invidividual’s
assets, colloquially called his "capital". Each is a store of value to
the individual. What is true of each individual must be true for all
together, is the thinking: it is the "fallacy of composition." We will
see herein that society cannot turn land into capital (A-6), and land is
not a store of value for society (A-10).

The discipline has not totally eliminated land, but marginalized it.
There is a subdiscipline called "Land Economics," and a journal of that
name. There are journals of Agricultural Economics, Urban Economics,
Regional Science, Environmental Economics, Natural Resources, and more.
There are also whole disciplines of Geography, Economic Geography,
Military Science, Biogeography, Geology, Geometry, Surveying, Astronomy,
Theology, Ecology, Oceanography, Meteorology, Soils, Physiography,
Topography, and Hydrology, all dealing with The Earth and Nature and
Creation as definable topics distinct from man’s works.

The subdisciplines are kept away from the "core" and "mainstream" of
economic thinking by compartmentalization and colonialization.
Patronizing "land economics" as a colonial discipline keeps potentially
contagious movements within the empire, where they can absorb critical
tendencies under watchful control, while yet remaining safely remote, in
the outskirts of the system. Orthodoxy flows out from the core,
communicated via mandatory "core courses." Land economics is banished
from the "commanding heights" of money and banking, macro policy, and
required "basic" courses in methodology and micro theory.

Colonial life is safe and easy, if dull and unfulfilling, but once
labelled "colonial" one is supposed to remain in the assigned cage. One
who attempts integration is "overambitious," and "spread too thin".
Colonials are not supposed to relate land economics to unemployment,
inflation, financial collapse, deficit finance, and such core topics.
They become unwitting co-conspirators in marginalizing their subject.

Micro theory is the inmost citadel of holy writ, where "the economic way
of thinking" is inculcated. It is required of all economics students
before they venture into real issues. It becomes their shibboleth, their
lingua franca, and shapes their worldview. Within common micro theory,
to the extent it relates to real life at all, the technique has been
first to relegate production economics to a minor role: "price theory"
comes first. Production economics deals with the optimal combination of
inputs in production, and how this relates to their relative costs. That
should lead right into factoral distribution, but this aspect is
soft-pedaled or omitted entirely. This omission alone is a fatal fault,
considering that the forces determining land rents vary inversely with
those determining rates of return on capital (cf. A-7 below).

Within production economics, "variable proportions" with "factor
symmetry" replaces diminishing returns. The parcel of land disappears as
a unit of analysis, replaced by "the firm," a disembodied spirit that
combines resources optimally, treating all alike as variable "in the
long run." In the "short run," land is subsumed in "fixed costs"; rising
demand that raises rents is just "imputed away" silently and lumped with
other elements of "fixed cost." If that sounds muddled, it is because
what it describes is muddled.\[4\]

Common micro theory finesses Time. It deals with economic relations as
though they occurred at a point in time. Sometimes two points are
allowed (short run and long). Thus micro theory can ignore the birth of
capital, its growth, maturity, senescence, death, burial, and
replacement, vital elements of its difference from land. Time, and
relations of sequence, are hived off to the far satellite of "finance,"
usually not even taught in departments of economics. Time is also
referred to under "history of economic thought," as an obsession of some
19th century Austrians who wrote quaintly of "roundabout" (time-using)
methods of production.\[5\] Relations of sequence are found in macro,
but not firmly integrated with micro theory, which is the enduring core
of the discipline. Micro theory still deals with relations of
coexistence in time, and space as well. As A.A. Mime once wrote, "It
isn’t really anywhere, it’s somewhere else instead." Of neo-classical
theory we may add, "It isn’t really anytime, it’s some other time
instead."\[6\]

All that is confusing for students and others. Land does have
distinctive qualities for economic analysis and policy. This essay gives
10 primary reasons why land is distinct from capital (and of course from
mankind itself) as an economic input. Then it gives 18 important
economic consequences thereof, and their policy implications. Making
land markets, land policy, and land taxation work well for the general
welfare is a major challenge for economists and statesmen. They have
neglected it too long by crediting and following the peculiar
neo-classical sophisms that obscure or deny all distinctions between
land and capital.

# A-1. Land is not produced nor reproduceable

Land is not produced, it was created. It is the world, the planet from
which man evolved, with the sun that energizes it and the orbit that
tempers it. Land is a free gift, variously expressed in different
philosophies as Spaceship Earth, the Big Blue Marble, God’s Gift,
Creation, Gaia, The Promised Land, or Nature. Mankind did not create The
Earth with its space and resources, nor can we add to them. We can only
acquire them, often by fighting, or rent-seeking, or in other
counterproductive ways. Man at best improves and develops capacities
inherent in the free gift. It is disappointing, and should alert us and
make us suspicious, that economic analysis would ever purge out this
paramount, self-evident truth.

"Land" in economics means all natural resources and agents, with their
sites (locations and extensions in space). Land is not just the matter
occupying space: it is space. It includes many things not colloquially
called land, such as water and the beds under it, the radio spectrum,
docks, rights of way, take-off/landing time slots for aircraft,
aquifers, ambient air (the right to breathe it and the license to
pollute), "air rights" to strata in the third dimension of cities,
falling water, wild fish, game, and vegetation, natural scenery,
weather, the environment, the ecology, the natural gene pool, etc. Any
franchise, license or privilege giving territorial rights is a species
of easement over land. Your driver’s license is a right to use land: red
lights remind us of the critical value of space at central locations,
since two objects cannot occupy the same space at the same time. It is
worth a lot to have the right-of-way, as railroads do.

Economic land excludes many things, too, that are colloquially called
land. It excludes land-fill, for example, by which many cities are
extended into shallow waters. The site and seabed are properly land; the
land-fill is an improvement. There is no "made land" in the economic
sense: it is reallocated from other uses. Expanding cities take farmland
from producing food and fiber, much ofit for the expanding city itself.
Filled land in shallow water near cities is taken away from anglers and
sailors and viewers and ecologists, who now routinely organize to save
it from being "made" away with. Drained and filled wetlands are taken
away from endangered species, as well as from their primal role as
filters protecting coastal waters from river trash and pollutants.
Thanks to the myopia and dereliction of economists, it has taken
militant environmentalists to carry home this truth, developing in their
struggle to be heard and understood a deep skepticism of economists and
their "way of thinking."

Capital is that which has been produced but not yet used up. Capital is
formed by human thrift, forebearance, investment and production. Only
after mankind forms and makes capital does it bear much likeness to
land, in that they coexist. Ordinary micro-economics obscures the
differences because it deals mainly with relations of coexistence,
ignoring the continual formation and destruction of capital, ignoring
time and relations of sequence. Thus it excludes from its purview one of
the prime differences between land and capital. The life of capital,
like that of people, is marked by major sacraments of birth, growth,
aging and death - all missing from micro theory. Micro deals mainly with
how existing resources are allocated at a moment in time, not how they
originate, grow, flourish, reproduce, age, die, and decompose.

Capital occupies space; land is space. In common micro theory, resources
and markets come together at a point not just in time but in space.
Again, it excludes from its purview one of the prime qualities of land.

For the reasons given, alone, land and capital are mutually exclusive.

# A-2. Land as site is permanent and recyclable

Land as "site" (location plus extension) does not normally wear out,
depreciate, spoil, obsolesce, nor get used up by human activities
incident to occupancy and production. In contrast, capital depreciates
from time and use, routinely and by nature. After being formed, it must
be conserved from entropy by continual maintenance, repair, remodeling,
safeguarding against theft and fire, and so on. Like our own bodies, it
returns to dust; land is the dust to which it returns. Inventories are
depleted; moving parts wear out; fixed capital depreciates with use and
time.\[7\]

Land normally does not depreciate as a function of time. Most attributes
of land also withstand use and abuse. Most land is, rather, expected to
appreciate in real value in the long run. Values go in cycles, but the
secular history is upwards as population, capital, and demands all grow
while land remains fixed. Capital has a period of formation during which
it accretes value by storing up other inputs and changing physical form,
but that is a phase. Once formed, almost all capital fails with time.

Perhaps the most durable capital is intellectual, like the writings of
Plato. These, however, do not endure generations without the continual
human effort and expense of education. As schools starve and libraries
close, it is sadly certain that much will be lost. Under any conditions
much is twisted in transmission, like classical economics itself.

Capital, however durable, also obsolesces because it is subject to
continual competition from streams of new products. Intellectual
capital, however classic, is subject to endless competition from floods
of new ideas and discoveries. Land does not obsolesce from this cause:
there is no new land, let alone modern, state-of-the-art land. Both land
and capital are subject to demand-obsolescence from changes in tastes
and fashions, but overall the taste for land as a consumer good rises as
incomes and wealth grow. The writer has documented elsewhere how the
land share of residential real estate value rises sharply with its total
value.\[8\] The land part of residential real estate is a "superior
good"; the building part is not.

It follows that the demand for land rises over time with incomes, but
faster than incomes. For example, the soaring demand for golf has
produced 150 golf courses in one California county (Riverside) alone,
preempting a good bit of the usable land and a huge share of this
natural desert’s limited water resources. The western quarter of
Massachusetts, the Berkshires, with adjoining parts of Connecticut, New
York, and Vermont, has become one vast country estate for suburban New
Yorkers and pensioners, and is priced high above its farm value. Ski
resorts, hunting clubs, yacht harbours, spas, beach resorts, and such
uses increasingly outbid mere utilitarian uses for prime lands. There is
also a high and rising technical multiplier of demand for land to
complement modern consumer capital. For example, the parking demands
alone of 200 million private cars in the USA. preempt an area as large
as Maryland and Delaware combined. Soaring demands and reuse values are
thus the norm in an affluent society.

What can it mean to "consume" land, when it does not get used up? It can
only mean to occupy or preempt a time-slot of space. That has the most
profound implications for the meaning of "consumption" in economic
thinking, and "consumer taxation" in fiscal policy. Economists have
neglected and papered over these matters almost completely. These are
pursued in B-13 below.

Some attributes of some lands do deteriorate from some uses or abuses.
Extractive resources call for special analysis, which the writer has
attempted elsewhere.\[9\] To avoid lengthy repetition from previous
publications, the word "land" herein refers to the permanent qualities
of land, exemplified by (but not limited to) site. Remember, land is not
just matter, it is space itself. It is not unusual for land first to be
mined, then used for dumping wastes, then sealed over for urban use. I
myself have lived comfortably over an old munitions dump on Lockehaven
Drive, Victoria, B.C.

Land is reusable. All the land we have is second-hand, most of it
previously-owned. Our descendants, in turn, will have nothing but our
hand-me-downs. As there is never any new supply, the old is recycled
periodically, and will be in perpetuity, without changing form or
location. Melded briefly with fixed buildings, land survives them to go
one more round of use. Even while melded with capital, land is fit for
another use at any time, unlike the capital on it. Land retains a
practicable, measurable, meaningful opportunity cost. Land value in
cities may be defined as "what is left after a good fire"; arsonists
take that quite literally. In Beverly Hills, California, "tear-downs"
are routine as taste-obsolescence races through fashionable
neighbourhoods where the land outvalues even the elegant buildings.
These are dated after thirty years.

The opportunity cost of capital is fleeting. Capital loses most of it
the moment it is committed to a specific form, whose physical
alternative use is often only as scrap. Land’s "opportunity cost" is
real and viable at all times. The scrap value of capital is often zero
or negative (radioactive waste supplying an extreme example).

Land may be afflicted with such "negative capital," the harmful waste
from prior usage. An example is the spent carcass of an old building
needing costly demolition. Some would class that spent carcass as a
subtraction from the site value, but "negative capital" makes more
sense, as may be inferred by considering the relations between a
landlord and a tenant in a perfect market. The lease holds the tenant
liable for damages he does and wastes he leaves; the prudent landlord
requires of the tenant a deposit, or in larger cases a bond, to assure
performance. Both acknowledge that damage done by use is imputed to the
user, not to the land.\[10\]

Too often, from institutional or market or human failure, the land is
left damaged, with no recourse against those responsible. Then, indeed,
the damage becomes part of the land, just as some of the good relics of
history may as well be considered part of the land. Toxic wastes, and
endemic parasites imported with previous crops or trees, become mixed
into the dirt. We do not trivialize nor quibble over what to call such
damage: it happens, and it impairs the reuse value of land. In such
cases the site is less valuable, but still permanent and recyclable.
Such cases are, fortunately, still more the exception than the rule.
They are at most a minor qualification to the major points made here.

Physical abuse of land is less a problem, actually, than the fall of
value that results from social decay. Much of land value is a social
product. When a society sickens, declines, and self-destructs, as we
know may happen, it lowers ground rents, which mirror social progress
and decay. We cannot surely forecast that our own society will not
self-destruct, as parts of cities already have. However, until it does,
land will outlast capital economically. Even when it does, landownership
may remain the last bastion, as happened in the feudal system. Even if
barbarians overrun us, it is the land they will take: little else will
remain.

# A-3. Land supply is fixed

Being both unreproducible and permanent, land remains fixed.\[11\] Both
the overall quantity and the special qualities of specific lands remain
fixed. Capital changes its form and location with each turnover, while
land remains the same. The Tyler Galleria neighbourhood in Riverside,
California, makes an example. In the last fifteen years over half the
buildings have been replaced or heavily remodeled. Streets have been
repaved and widened; utilities enhanced. Inventories have turned over
hundreds of times; cars in the parking lots have come and gone thousands
of times. The land is the same.

The fixity of land has several aspects.

1.  The overall planet is fixed.
    
    Even the planet may change, but "fixed" here means "given" or
    "exogenous" or "outside individual control," not necessarily static.
    Cosmic and tectonic and climatic changes are given, so far as man is
    concerned. Changes caused by mankind collectively are given so far
    as individual landowners are concerned.

2.  Land is fixed within political jurisdictions.
    
    Political jurisdictions are defined as areas of land. Capital and
    labour cross political boundary lines; land stays put. An "open
    economy" is open to money and goods, to capital and labour, not to
    land. For tax consequences, cf. A-4 and B-5 below.

3.  Land as site is immobile in space, permanently.\[12\].
    
    Much capital, on the other hand, is physically mobile by wheel,
    hoof, wing or boat. California calls this "unsecured" property, and
    France calls it "meubles ", as distinct from the other kind which is
    "secured" and "immeuble."\[13\] Most American jurisdictions use the
    less expressive "personal" and "real" property for the same
    distinction.
    
    Secured or "real" capital is capital affixed to land. The physical
    carcass of most buildings is rooted to the spot, leading some to
    allege buildings are as fixed in location as land. That would be
    specious, economically. The capital locked up in the carcasses of
    buildings is normally recovered, as they depreciate, in Capital
    Consumption Allowances (CCAs) which may be reinvested anywhere.
    
    "Basic" micro economic theory, as ordinarily ordained today, is
    constructed so as to paper over this basic difference of land and
    capital. In its "short run" land and capital are both fixed. In its
    "long run" both are equally variable to "the firm," the disembodied
    spirit used as its unit of analysis, existing at a point in time and
    space. Thus, one can specialize for a lifetime in "basic micro"
    while remaining unaware that capital, over time, changes its form
    and location as it turns over, unlike land. Land yields no such
    mobile funds as CCAs. It does not depreciate, and is priced
    accordingly higher, so its income is only enough to yield a return
    on the price paid, not a return of it. This is refuted below.
    
    Land is "mobile" only in the limited sense that its use may change.
    Some micro economists would have this sort of "mobility" equate land
    to capital. See A-5,a, below.

4.  Land is fixed in form.
    
    Capital, in contrast, is Protean, assuming one form after another.
    Capital is also fungible with each turnover. Capital Consumption
    Allowances in money join the common worldwide pool of disposable
    capital. Money itself is not capital, but is generalized command
    over a share of the flow of current production. Thus, capital loses
    its specific identity with each turnover.

5.  Acquiring land must mean taking others'.
    
    No one can get more land without others keeping less. One can
    acquire more capital by forming it through saving and investing. One
    can consume more by working more, while others work no less. Land is
    different: it is the most common basis of market power, therefore
    (cf. B-11, below).

# A-4. Land is immobile in space and uncontrollable in time

1.  Land does not migrate.
    
    When demand grows for land in a specific area or neighbourhood, land
    cannot immigrate to meet the higher demand. It is true that land
    elsewhere can be converted to the specific land use that is
    demanded. Some micro theorists argue that this makes land as
    "mobile" as anything else, which equates land and capital. It
    dovetails with and reinforces their paradigm centred on "the firm,"
    a unit that can add unlimited inputs of all kinds in the long run,
    and among which competition drives all profits to zero. This
    rationalization overlooks the hoary adage of real estate: "value
    depends on three factors, location, location, and location." What
    happens then is not that supply rises to meet higher demand, but
    ground rent rises.
    
    Robert Triffin wrote that "excess returns are either competed away,
    or imputed away." Excess returns to capital are the ones that get
    competed away; excess returns to land get imputed away. Rents and
    land prices rise where demand is focused. Interest rates, the cost
    of capital, do not rise: capital abhors a vacuum, and rushes in to
    bring returns back down to the common worldwide level. If anything,
    interest rates are lower in central cities because of the more
    perfect markets that develop there. Intensive development and use of
    the third dimension at the hub of a city makes it even more
    attractive, through synergy (conglomerate increasing returns to
    scale), raising rents still more.

2.  The services of land flow and perish with time.
    
    Land is "immobile in time" in the sense that its services flow
    steadily with time. They cannot be stored and shifted forward to
    meet anticipated higher future demand, like stored goods. They
    cannot be bunched, like military tanks for an attack. One cannot
    reach into the future and marshal them for present needs or
    emergencies. They are never "on tap," for drawing down at will;
    neither may they be set aside for future use. Rather they flow down
    the river and out the. gates of time to sink forever into the dead
    past.
    
    Land services may be and are used to produce capital, and the
    capital is stored up. An example is land used for growing timber, or
    raising seedlings to bearing age. Another example is flowing water
    stored in a reservoir. This does not convert land into capital,
    however, any more than it converts labour into capital. Stored-up
    labour and land-service are capital: that is what capital is, by
    definition.\[14\] Nature’s services *per se*, however, come in a
    flow like time itself, unbidden and uncontrollable. Mankind cannot
    advance nor retard its services at will. Considering the improvident
    nature of mankind that is perhaps a good thing, but good or bad, it
    is so.\[15\]
    
    Land titles serve as "stores of value" for individual owners. By the
    common fallacy of composition, plus some confusion, that makes it
    all too easy for laymen, and economists too, to think of land as a
    store of social value. The individual can tap this store, however,
    only by selling it to another. Neither of them can advance or retard
    the flow of services at will.
    
    Usually the given flow is steady or seasonal, but not always or
    necessarily. Seasons change, climates change, environments change,
    blights and pestilences come and go. The essence of land service
    flow is not steadiness, but exogeneity. Alfred Marshall defined the
    "public value of land" as the product of three factors exogenous to
    the private owner: nature, public services, and spillovers from the
    use of nearby private land. This "neo-classical" was classically
    right on this point (great economists seldom fit snugly into tight
    boxes).

3.  Land is not uniform to a user or firm.
    
    When a firm adds land to its operation, the added land is normally
    farther from the firm’s nucleus and not, therefore, homogeneous. The
    added land is marginal to the firm in location, not just in
    quantity. The marginal location means that more internal
    transportation cost is required to integrate the added land with the
    operation. That is a prime diseconomy of scale, limiting the optimal
    area of producing units.
    
    As a firm expands it takes land from the margins of neighbouring
    firms. As Firm A continues to expand, the zone of acquisition moves
    farther from A’s nucleus, but closer to that of B, its neighbour. As
    the zone advances, the contested land becomes of higher value to B,
    and lower value to A. Again, this is a matter both of pure quantity
    and specific location. Military Science would produce few winners if
    it aped Economics and ignored such facts.
    
    It is different when a growing firm adds labour and capital to its
    operation. These are drawn from the margins of other operations, but
    they are marginal only in quantity, not location. They are
    homogenous units, and may be added to the core of the growing
    operation. That continues to be so, however much Firm A grows, or B
    shrinks. This is because labour and capital migrate, and their
    supplies are a "pool." No one neighbour is singled out for raiding;
    there is no locational factor.
    
    This locational factor qualifies the idea of "factor symmetry," as
    developed by Clark and Wicksteed,\[16\] and expressed in the
    replacement of "diminishing returns" by "variable proportions" in
    economic analysis. It is impossible to add "homogeneous" land to an
    operation: each unit has a unique location, and added land is
    normally farther from the nucleus.
    
    This consideration, taken alone, would make landholdings tend toward
    uniformity, to minimize internal transport costs. In fact, however,
    landholdings are less uniform than other measures of firm size, like
    labour force, capital improvements, sales, and value-added. These
    facts are consistent with an hypothesis that the acquisition of land
    as a store of value, dominated by financial forces tending toward
    concentration, interferes with efficiency in land markets. This
    hypothesis is further considered in B-11.
    
    Added land, besides being farther from a nucleus, may be farther
    from a street interface. In retailing this is extremely weighty.
    Land added to water front parcels may be far from the shore, and so
    on.

4.  Land division is a highly social process.
    
    1.  Land division entails "packing.".
        
        One individual parcel does not expand or contract without
        impacting the whole system. Parcels have common boundaries and
        must be packed together so that they all fit. Many costs like
        fencing and roads and utilities are shared along the common
        boundaries. These costs vary with the length of the boundaries.
    
    2.  Capital and labour come in "nuclei." Each parcel has its
        nucleus, as, for example, a farm centres on its farmstead.\[17\]
        The nucleus is the indivisible core of labour/capital applied to
        the land. Land division entails more nuclei, hence greater
        intensity of land use, for whatever purpose.
        
        "Nucleus" here is a proxy for labour/capital, although one
        nucleus is not a fixed quantity of labour/capital. Generally the
        nucleus shrinks as the acreage shrinks, but in lesser
        proportion, so intensity of land use rises.

5.  Nuclei are interdependent.
    
    In finding the optimal resultant of these opposing forces we are
    faced with more than a standard example of diminishing returns. One
    could perceive land division as simply a matter of applying more
    people and capital to a given area of land. The more intensive
    application to each acre justifies itself up to a point by added
    yields from each acre; beyond that the added yields do not
    compensate for the added costs.
    
    But there is more here than a simple matter of quantities and
    proportions of inputs. There is also a distance factor. The more
    parcels we add the closer are their nuclei, and the less is the cost
    of linking them along the common lines. The cost per acre is, to be
    sure, higher: that is inherent in adding more labour and capital to
    a given amount of land. But the linkage cost per parcel drops as we
    add nuclei by dividing land into more parcels.
    
    There is an asymmetry here that has been obscured in the evolution
    of marginal productivity theory, with its effort to show that the
    relationships among all the classical factors of production are
    "symmetrical," so that diminishing returns is simply variable
    proportions. Land is not symmetrical with labour/capital. When you
    add nuclei of labour/capital to land, they get packed closer
    together. But when you add land to fixed labour and capital, the
    units all get farther apart —the land units as well as the nuclei of
    labour/ capital.

6.  Land is immobile among taxing jurisdictions.
    
    Tax jurisdictions are specific areas of land: they are defined that
    way. Land cannot escape from taxation, therefore (cf. A-3). Further,
    it follows that all purely local taxes are shifted to land, whatever
    the nominal base of the tax (cf. B-5). If the application of labour
    and capital to land yields no surplus or rent, there is no tax base:
    any attempt to tax the labour and capital must simply drive them
    away, unless the use of the taxes itself creates rent. This is the
    "Physiocratic law of tax incidence."\[18\] Likewise, purely local
    services add to land rents.

# A-5. Land does not turn over. It is recycled and is versatile

1.  Land is not convertible into other land.
    
    Each unit of land is permanently unique. Capital, on the other hand,
    is pool homogeneous "pool" over time: as each unit degrades and
    yields back its substance, the owner may reinvest the Capital
    Consumption Allowances in anything. Thus, capital is fungible: one
    specific item of capital is universally convertible into any other.
    Land is not at all fungible: no specific unit of land is convertible
    into any other.
    
    J.B. Clark tried to wipe out this distinction, which brought him
    into debate with Boehm-Bawerk over whether capital has a "period of
    production". Frank Knight, following Clark, renewed the debate with
    Friedrich von Hayek. The intent of both Clark and Knight was to
    shelter land behind the skirts of capital, to counter a popular
    movement for taxing land more and capital less. Students are still
    required to study these dreary, mystical exchanges, which seem to
    have no other purpose.
    
    The rate of turnover of capital may vary, and does, over a wide
    range, from once a day for restaurant fresh vegetables to once a
    century for slow-growth timber. Thus, the "valency" with which
    capital combines with labour is highly variable. The land/labour
    valency is not fixed, but it contains no such extreme factor as
    this.

2.  Land is necessarily versatile.
    
    Capital is made to order for specific needs. Land must serve all of
    man’s needs of the day, and perpetual streams, waves, and eddies of
    new fads and demands, with no physical change.
    
    New demands and discoveries bring out new virtues in old land but it
    is man that has changed, not land. The resources were always there
    waiting.
    
    In the long run, the pool of capital is totally versatile as old
    specialized capital wears out and is replaced with new. Thus, land
    is less versatile than capital regarded as a pool in the long run.
    However, existing specialized capital, committed to a specific form,
    loses most of its opportunity cost. Capital suffers from various
    kinds of obsolescence, including, when affixed to land, locational
    obsolescence. Land rarely does. Land’s opportunity cost remains a
    viable option, because the only source of land for new uses today,
    as for ages past, is to take it from its previous use. Even land
    taken from the Indians, as they keep reminding us, had a previous
    use.
    
    It is the common markets in labour, capital and commodities that
    exert the common influences. The versatility of individual land
    parcels is often considerable, it is true. Land in the long run is
    more versatile than is specialized existing capital in the short
    run. Comparing long run with long run, however, it is capital that
    is totally versatile.

3.  Land *per se* is economically divisible, unlike capital.
    
    Since land does not have to be produced, it can be divided into
    parcels as small as you please. Capital is economically indivisible,
    an economist’s word which does not mean quite what it appears to.
    One can produce very small trucks or ships or buildings, but the
    cost per unit of useful capacity rises as they get smaller: that is
    "indivisibility." Its converse is economy of scale.
    
    Economies of scale are inherent attributes of capital and labour,
    not land. They spring from using large units of capital; or large
    teams of workers with specialized members. For this large lands are
    required, but the scale economies are not in the land. It is usually
    a social diseconomy to acquire large lands because they impinge on
    others and push them out of the way. Thus a large truck requires
    more street space which may require widening streets which take land
    from the buildings between the streets. Large buildings require
    either land assembly, or prior withholding of land over long
    periods, or going to bad locations on cheap land. All of these are
    costly.
    
    In subdividing land into small parcels there are, it is true, extra
    costs, but the cost per lot falls. Of course the cost per square
    foot rises, but the cost per dollar of value created generally also
    falls, which is why it is done. Apartments, condominia, strata
    titles and time-sharing represent extreme subdivision without
    increasing cost.
    
    Those who require much land normally have limited choice of
    locations: they must go where land may be had in large pieces. It is
    either that, or buy it already assembled by others, that is not so
    true of those who need large labour or capital inputs.

4.  It is cheaper to build units of capital all at once.
    
    Capital, unlike land, has to be built. Normally capital will retain
    through life its original scale, and other basic characteristics,
    because it is so costly to add-on after construction. Buildings are
    adapted to particular sites when built, and are seldom raised or
    lowered after construction. (Capital in its making has economies
    both of scale, and "simultaneity".)

# A-6. Land is not interchangeable with capital

Land is not convertible into capital, nor vice versa. Exchange of land
for capital has misled many into equating them, but only through
inadvertence and the fallacy of composition. Exchange is not
interchange: exchange does not change the quantity of either land or
capital. Capital is convertible into any other form of capital each time
it turns over, by using Capital Consumption Allowances, the proceedings
of turnover, to hire people actually to produce new capital. Capital may
also be disinvested and consumed, or augmented by new saving and
investment. None of those is true of land.

The fact above seems simple when laid out overtly, yet economists
overlook it when they frame tax policy. Nonconvertibility gives an
entirely new meaning to the old goal of "uniformity" in taxation,
belying the notion that uniformity makes for a "level playing field", or
neutrality in taxation. Uniformity is desirable to avoid "excise tax"
effects, but that end does not require uniformity as between land and
capital, only uniformity within each class. Cf. B-6.

# A-7. Land rents are subject to market forces that differ from those that determine interest rates (the price of capital)

Interest rates around the world rise and fall in sympathy. They are
subject to common, interconnecting forces of supply and demand,
transmitted swiftly even in past centuries, and today instantaneously.

Land rents, too, rise and fall together in response to common forces.
However, the forces are different for land rents than for interest
rates, so they do not vary in sympathy. Even though the lands are not
mutually convertible, they are subject to common forces, the greatest of
which is the interest rate itself. Capital and land are rivals for the
same pie, so usually their returns vary inversely. Ground rent equals
operating cash flow less interest on the cost of building, and less
building depreciation. A rise of interest rates lowers ground rents.

It is hard to see how any forecast of the results of economic policy, or
any forecast for investment purposes, could have any value without
keeping focused on this distinction. Sometimes it is handled by
distinguishing "old" from "new" assets or issues. Yet, in general,
neo-classical doctrine tells us to meld land and capital in economic
thinking of all kinds.

# A-8. Land price guides investors and determines the character of capital, as capital substitutes for land

High land price guides investors to prefer kinds of capital that
substitute for land. Although capital cannot be converted into land, it
can substitute for land, and does so when rents and land prices are
high. John Stuart Mill long ago pointed out that the structure and
character of capital is determined by the level of rents and
wages.\[19\] Such substitution is an integral part of the equilibrating
function of markets; the human race could never have attained its
present numbers and density without it. High wages evoke labour-saving
capital; high rents evoke land-saving capital. It is useful to carry
this farther, and recognize five kinds of substitutive capital evoked by
high rents and land prices:

1.  Land-saving capital, like high buildings.

2.  Land-enhancing capital, meaning capital used to improve land for a
    new, higher use.

3.  Land-linking capital, like canals and rails and city streets.

4.  Land-capturing (rent-seeking) capital, like squatters' improvements,
    and canal and rail lines built to secure land grants, and dams and
    canals built to secure water rights.

5.  Rent-leading capital

These are defined and discussed in Section C-3.

To understand the forces shaping capital investment, one must recognize
the difference of land and capital. High land prices evoke substitution
of capital for land, shaping the capital stock in particular ways.
Viewed positively, this is a central part of economic equilibration,
tempering land scarcity. Viewed negatively, it has led historically to
boom and bust cycles (cf. C-3).

# A-9. Land is limitational

Land and capital are mutually exclusive. Each is also limitational,
meaning all human activity requires at least some of each.

Land is indispensable to life, hence to economic activity. The same is
generally true of labour and capital, but less "absolutely". Land can
exist perfectly well without labour or capital, and support timber and
wildlife, but labour and capital cannot exist at all without at least
some land, and often a great deal of land. Substitution is limited. It
will not do just to have 57 varieties of labour, or of capital. There
must be at least some land. Remember, land includes space itself, and a
time-slot in it. It includes air and water, the environment and the
ecology and all original matter itself. Without land there is
nothing.\[20\] Coupling this with the non-reproduceability of land, and
its fixity, land is distinctive.

"Homelessness," a modern plague, is essentially landlessness. A popular
ditty from the 1930s includes the catchy line, "If you can’t pay the
rent, you can live in a tent," but you can’t do even that without a
campsite. Perhaps this is why modern economists have so little to say
about homelessness. Joblessness they have dismissed as part of the vital
economic function of "job-seeking," with which they have persuaded at
least themselves. The next logical step is that the person sleeping in
the doorway is not really homeless, butjust engaged in the vital market
function of "home-seeking". Rather than seem totally absurd they are
simply silent, except to stress the "exclusionary principle" of private
property as the bedrock of their system, and their system as a panacea.

In this they are out of step with general thinking. In France, at least,
polls have shown for several years the two most respected and popular
figures are the Abbé Pierre, who crusades for the homeless, and Jacques
Cousteau the environmentalist, who also preaches on the folly of
ignoring the limitational nature of land.

There is scope for massive substitution of land for labour and capital,
and labour and capital for land. That is, the proportions in which we
combine the factors are variable. This substitution cannot, however, be
carried so far as to dispense with land altogether: this is the meaning
of limitational.\[21\] Piling more capital on the same land is limited
by diminishing returns.

Therefore the three factors are always found working in combination, and
much of economic theory used to deal with how they are combined. Some of
it still does; the rest floats in outer space, perhaps communing with
the ghost of Plato.

# A-1O. Land value is not an economic fund

Economists teach that all economic values are either funds or flows. It
is a seductive division, and often useful, but too simple by far. Land
value is neither, but a third kind of value, sui generis. Mankind cannot
add to it, nor draw from it as from a true fund. Individuals can and do,
by exchange. Even nations can, by selling to aliens. Thanks to the
fallacy of composition that lets us forget that these are merely
intermediate transactions which collectively accomplish nothing. In
famine, or war, or capital. shortage, society cannot live on land
values. These are not accumulations of stores, but merely the present
value of anticipated future service flows which cannot be hastened.

Further divisions are distinctive too, in other contexts. Exhaustible
resources (excluded from this discussion) could be called "natural
funds." Fixed capital, slowly depreciating with time, is a "flowing
fund." Soils have additional components. But basic permanent location
value, our present focus, is in no way an economic "fund."

# Summary

Land and capital\[22\] are mutually exclusive categories, provided that
"exclusive" is understood properly.

1.  Some of each is essential to production.

2.  They are not mutually convertible.

They are substitutable (see above), but convertible is different.
Capital and labour in the long run (not very long, for most capital) are
fungible pools as they reproduce and replace themselves, generation
following generation. That is, all capital is convertible into any other
form of capital when it is replaced. It is not convertible into land.
That is one implication of "mutually exclusive."

Capital is fungible in the long run, i.e. every, unit or "molecule" is
convertible to any other. Labour is slightly less so, and the
generations are longer.\[23\]

Thus all capital tends to earn the same rate of return at the margin.
There is a "pool" of capital, whose returns are subject to common
influences. The labour pool is more differentiated, but still, all wage
and salary rates are subject to common influences through the interfiow
caused by competition and mobility. In the long run, replaceability of
capital makes individual "capitals" totally fungible, i.e. perfect
substitutes for each other—​but not for land. So it is, too, with
labour, without the same perfection.

Land rents tend to rise and fall together, too, being subject to common
influences: direct demand, indirect demand via commodity prices, input
costs, wage rates, and real interest rates.

# B-1. The origin of property in land is not economic

1.  Politics guides the original distribution.
    
    The initial distribution of land - the origin of property inland -
    is military, legal, and political, not economic. The prime business
    of nations throughout history has been to gain and defend land. What
    was won by force has no higher sanction than *lex fortioris*, and
    must be kept and defended by force.
    
    After land is appropriated by a nation the original distribution is
    political. The nature of societies, cultures and economies for
    centuries afterwards are molded by that initial distribution,
    exemplified by the differences between Costa Rica (equal partition)
    and El Salvador with its fabled "Fourteen Families" (Las Catorce),
    or between Canada and Argentina.
    
    Political redistribution also occurs within nations, as with the
    English enclosures and Scottish "clearances," when one part of the
    population in effect conquered the rest by political machinations,
    and took over their land, their source of livelihood.
    Reappropriation and new appropriation of tenures is not just an
    ancient or a sometime thing but an ongoing process. This very day
    proprietary claims to water sources, pollution rights, access to
    rights of way, radio spectrum, signal relay sites, landing rights,
    beach access, oil and gas, space on telephone and power poles (e.g.
    for cable TV), taxi licences, etc. are being created under our
    noses. In developing countries of unstable government the current
    strong man often grants concessions to imperialistic adventurers who
    can bolster his hold on power by supplying both cash up front, and
    help from various US and UN agencies from the IMF to the United
    States Marine Corps.
    
    Ordinary economic thinking today would have it that a nation that
    distributes land among private parties by "selling to the highest
    bidder" is using an economic method of distribution. Such thinking
    guides World Bank and IMF economists as they advise nations emerging
    from communism on how to privatize land. The neutrality is specious,
    at best. Even selling to the high bidder is a political decision, as
    19th century American history makes clear.
    
    1.  The right to sell was won by force, is not universally honoured,
        and must be kept by continuous use of force.
    
    2.  In practice, selling for cash up front reserves most land for a
        few with front-money advantage, inside information, good
        contacts, corrupt aids, etc. The history of disposal of US
        public domain leaves no doubt about this and it is still going
        on with air rights, water, radio, landing rights, fishing
        licenses, etc. Choices being made currently are just as tainted
        as those of 19th century history.
        
        Selling land in large blocks under frontier conditions is to
        sell at a time before it begins yielding much if any rent. It is
        bid in by those few who have large discretionary funds of
        patient money. Politicians, meantime, treat the proceeds as
        current revenues used to hold down other taxes today, leaving
        the nation with inadequate revenues in the future.
    
    3.  The ability to bid high does not necessarily come from
        legitimate saving. The early wealth of Liverpool came from the
        slave trade. High bidders for many properties today are middle
        eastern potentates who neither produced nor saved the wealth
        they control. Other high bidders are criminals, who find the
        "sanctity of property" a splendid route for laundering their
        gains, and a permanent shelter against further prosecution.
        
        Apart from such obvious cases, more generally, control over
        front money, however honestly acquired historically, is a factor
        separate from the ability to use land productively. This is
        addressed below, in B-8.
        
        This matter of the origins of property in land is skirted,
        ignored, obscured, or trivialized by libertarian (neo-anarchist)
        philosophers, e.g. the Chicago School, and their lead is
        followed by the mass of economists today.\[24\] It is the
        Achilles' heel of these and allied philosophies. One of these,
        the contract theory of the state, was heavily used to sell
        Proposition 13 in California in 1978. Howard Jarvis, the author
        and protagonist, repeated daily that "Property should pay only
        for services to property, not services to people." "Services to
        property" he construed very narrowly indeed.
        
        Ownership and tenure rights derive only from appropriation, not
        saving, investment or production. Capital, by contrast, is owned
        by those who formed it.

2.  Inertia takes over after the original distribution, perpetuating and
    aggravating it.
    
    Inertia, both financial and political, transmitted through
    generations by inheritance, is a major control over the distribution
    of wealth and income. How else can one explain their exceedingly
    distorted distributions, in contrast with the normal distribution of
    most human abilities? Inertia extends the original pattern for
    generations. More, the advantages given by controlling discretionary
    funds (those not needed for subsistence) magnify the original
    political result.
    
    "Positive" economists and Libertarians, who fancy they have found in
    private property rights a "value-free," apolitical basis for
    thinking about and structuring society, have to paper over the
    political origins of landownership. If one’s grandfather was a slave
    when the Land Office was parcelling out Federal lands to the friends
    and cousins of corrupt Congressmen, one may be excused from
    believing Utopia will ensue from limiting all future changes to
    "win-win" Pareto-optimal changes from the inherited status quo.
    "Offset rights" to pollute the neighbourhoods of the poor are
    granted today to those whose claim to the privilege is their history
    of polluting. The political basis of these "offset rights" (licences
    to pollute) being currently created shines forth unmistakeably.

3.  Privatization is dominated by giveaways and resultant "Rentseeking",
    which warps allocation.
    
    Another thing libertarian philosophers must paper over is the
    rentseeking that occurs in the creation of private tenures. They
    avidly push privatization as The Panacea, but ignore the process of
    privatization and its consequences. Private tenure is often granted
    under customs that make it a prize for occupying or fixing some
    capital on land, and continuing to operate it with "due diligence"
    ("use it or lose it"). Premature investment, settlement and
    development are frequent results, seriously distorting the
    allocation of land, labour and capital and contributing to the
    "Congested Frontier" problem (cf. B-2.)
    
    Some assets that are privatized in this way, *de jure or de facto*,
    include England’s North Sea oil (where it is called "performance
    bidding"); water in the 17 western States of the USA, and four
    western provinces of Canada; the radio spectrum; licenses to pollute
    air ("offset rights"); US farmland under Squatters' Rights (1841)
    and the Homestead Act (1862); US and Canadian railroad land grants;
    fishing quotas; farm production and acreage quotas; cartel shares;
    utility franchises with duty-to-serve; etc.
    
    The tolerance of neo-classically-trained libertarian economists for
    such distortions knows no bounds nor shame. A current example in
    California is their push to convert conditional water licenses into
    permanent property rights. They would give the present licensees
    perpetual, alienable property notjust in the water, but in past and
    ongoing government subsidies to build and operate the water
    distribution system.\[25\]

# B-2. Much land remains untenured

Access to land is open by nature until and unless land is appropriated,
defended, bounded and policed. No one claims land by right of
production; no producer must be rewarded to evoke and maintain the
supply; and submarginal land is not worth policing, unless to preempt it
for its possible future values, orto preclude anticipated competition
for markets or labour. Centuries of human customs have developed around
regulating common use of lands with open access.

Tenure control of some land tends to drive the excluded population to
untenured land (the "commons"), creating an allocational bias unless all
land is either tenured or common. Thomas N. Carver styled this the
phenomenon of "The Congested Frontier", and he might have added
backwoods. Land which is partly common today includes parks and public
beaches, streets and highways, water surfaces, wild fish and game, and
some at least of the "wide open spaces" in less hospitable regions.
Today there are homeless people for whom life would literally be
impossible without some form of access, however precarious, to untenured
land. Some of it, ironically, is near the centres of large cities, where
the price of land is highest.

No great damage is done if submarginal land is untenured: it won’t be
used anyway. There may be damage, however, when rentable land is
untenured. It attracts too many entrepreneurs with too much labour and
capital, leading either to the use of private force to establish
tenure—​unjust, dangerous, and wasteful—​or overcrowding and waste,
called the "dissipation of rent," when the average cost of the average
firm equals the average product of labour and capital. Fisheries and
open range are classic cases.

Some land of high value is untenured or underpriced because consumers
resist paying for what they think of as "free" because it has no cost of
production, and which nature continues to supply even though the price
is too low to ration the land economically. Examples: water whose
natural source is in southern California (it is tenured, but
underpriced); city streets for movement and parking space, even in New
York; air and water used for waste disposal in populated areas; housing
that is subject to rent controls; popular beaches and trails; oil and
gas subject to field price controls; and so on.

When land is open to public access, so may be the capital used to
improve it, e.g. paving of rights-of-way. Such capital may also suffer
the excessive congestion. This open access to capital is mainly an
incident to the lack of land tenure—​a characteristic more of land than
of capital as such.\[26\] Remember, capital occupies space, but land is
space.

It is also possible to legislate and subsidize open access to some kinds
of labour and capital services, e.g. public health measures, and
education. These differ from common lands in that they are not open "by
nature," but by art and public expenditure.

# B-3. Landownership imparts superior bargaining power

Labour starves, in contests of endurance; land endures. A landowner is
also a person with labour power. He or she can earn income like any
worker. Landownership gives income above that, which gives discretionary
spending or waiting power.

In contests with capital, land has the greater waiting power because
over time capital depreciates, while land appreciates. Thus landowners
(when free of heavy taxation) are noted for their patience. Patience is
the essence of bargaining power.

Because land is fixed, more ownership by one person or group means less
ownership by others. To expand is to preempt, unavoidably. Thus, the
expanding agent necessarily weakens others by the same stroke that
strengthens himself. Landownership often gives market power in the sale
of specific commodities and services. See B-11.

# B-4. Land Rent does not evoke production, thrift or investment

Land rent, however high, does not raise the rate of return (ROR) on
investment in land purchase. It may sometimes lower ROR in the formation
of true capital.

1.  Land rent does not determine interest rates.
    
    There is a worldwide market for capital, flawed to be sure, but
    quite operational. Capital flows tend to create a common, worldwide
    and industrywide rate of return on capital, based on the
    productivity of capital as demand and the urge to consume as a limit
    on supply. With this the rent of land has nothing to do, directly.
    There is no rate of return on creating land; no common level of land
    rents. Higher rents do not increase the return on investments and
    pull up interest rates; they are capitalized into higher land
    values, using the given interest rate which is determined by the
    supply of and demand for capital, not land.
    
    If the return to capital rises in a place or an industry, capital
    flows in until the rate of return on new investment falls to the
    common level. The excess returns to capital are competed away. When
    land rents rise, on the other hand, the excess returns are concealed
    by higher land prices which are treated as costs of production.
    Arbitrage pushes up land prices, using the interest rate borrowed
    from the market for capital where it is determined. This creates an
    illusion of a return that results from buying land, but acquiring
    land does not build the asset that yields the return. The return
    comes first, and exists regardless of what is paid for it; the price
    derives from the return (cf. A-4).
    
    In terms of ordinary cost theory, land price is part of Fixed Cost.
    As demand rises, average fixed cost rises enough to soak up all
    excess returns. As it is sometimes put, land’s "cost" is not
    price-determining, but price determined. Calling it a "cost," and
    lumping it with other costs, has tended to hide this difference in
    obscurity, ambiguity, and a touch of mystery, which are the basic
    tools of sophistry.
    
    If land rents do affect interest rates it is not by increasing the
    productivity of and demand for capital. It is likely to be the
    reverse: high asking prices for land can cut into and reduce the
    return to capital. In short, high building prices raise the demand
    for investment; high land values lower it.
    
    Whether high land values do or not reduce returns to investors
    depends on whether they are properly high — i.e. they reflect the
    high productive value of land — or overpriced, in a cost-push
    phenomenon. Overpushing building rentals does happen, but vacancies
    result and correction is likely, especially when the building is on
    the steep gradient of its depreciation and obsolescence curves.
    
    Overpricing land titles is common - witness all the vacant land in
    and around cities. It may go on for years before it is recognized
    and corrected, especially when land is on the steep gradient of its
    appreciation curve, and near an edge or ecotone (zones of change of
    land use) of conversion to higher use. Ordinary theory obscures
    this, to the extent that it treats land at all, by calling land rent
    a "residual." Landowners in real life are not so passive: they get
    paid up front when they sell to builders. (Demanding high ground
    rents in long term leases to builders is also common and has similar
    effects.) When this occurs it lowers the rate of return on building.
    Where the land is paid or contracted for up front and on fixed
    terms, the building only gets the residual.

2.  Existence of land value actually lowers saving rates.
    
    1.  Land value substitutes for real capital in portfolios and thus
        lowers the need to create real capital. This is the same effect
        that historians have noted about the negative effect of slavery
        on capital formation. High land values may also affect interest
        rates indirectly by reducing saving and the supply of capital.
        The existence of high land rents and values, like the ownership
        of slaves, tends to satisfy the need for accumulation of assets
        without any actual capital formation.
    
    2.  Rising land prices are net income to individuals. Most of net
        income is normally consumed. "Equity withdrawal" is a common
        form that this takes. Another form is letting land appreciation
        substitute for a capital consumption allowance as capital
        depreciates.

3.  Investing in land is macro-economically sterile. It creates neither
    income nor capital. Socially, it is a wash: one buys, one sells,
    nothing else happens.

4.  Public policy needs to promote capital formation but not land
    creation.
    
    For creating land, thrift is not needed, nor can it avail: no man
    can create land. Thrift creates no land, and the value of land,
    however high, stimulates no thrift. Land rent may be taxed heavily
    without discouraging capital formation. Indeed capital formation
    would be encouraged if land prices were lowered, because there is a
    diminishing marginal utility of assets to private holders. The loss
    of land values would stimulate new saving to make up the loss.

5.  Land price is unrelated to cost of producing land.
    
    The present value of land is not derived from nor caused by nor
    related to its cost of production. It has none. Present value is
    derived solely by discounting future ground rents.
    
    With capital the sequence is that persons save to form capital, a
    lump sum, which then yields a service flow. Capital formation
    precedes and causes the service flow. With land the sequence is
    reversed. The service flow is a free gift which simply exists. The
    buyer does not create it, nor cause others to create it; he simply
    acquires it. The expected service flow is then converted into a lump
    sum present value by the process called "capitalizing," i.e. making
    land superficially resemble capital for purposes of exchange.
    However, it is land price that adjusts to a given rent, rather than
    rent being determined at a level sufficient to reward producing the
    asset. The interest (or capitalization) rate at which rent is
    converted to price is determined by the supply of and demand for
    real capital, not land.

# B-5. Land rent is a taxable surplus

Land rent is nearly identical with taxable surplus. This follows from
the simple observation that the supplies of labour and capital are
highly elastic. E.R.G. Seligman has alleged that a marginal community,
on no-rent land, would have no tax base if it could tax nothing but
land. In fact, this hypothetical community has no tax base anyway.
Whatever labour or capital it tries to tax will leave, or never arrive.
It just barely pays to use marginal land. Capital will only appear to
pay a tax if it can shift it to land in the form of a lower rent on
purchase price. If rent was already zero, there is no place to shift it.

This matter is treated at length in my contribution to Private Property
and Public Finance, a volume in this series.

# B-6. Uniformity in taxation between land and capital is not neutral

1.  Land and capital are not interchangeable. They are mutually
    exclusive. Individuals may exchange one for the other but that does
    not change the quantity of either.
    
    The fact of non-convertibility gives a new meaning to the ordinary
    concept that "uniformity" in taxation is neutral and desirable in
    all cases. Uniformity is desirable to avoid "excise tax" effects,
    but that end does not require uniformity between land and capital,
    only uniformity within each class.
    
    However much the capital be taxed, it will not be converted into
    land. By definition, it cannot be. Likewise, however much land be
    taxed, it cannot be converted into capital.
    
    It follows that "uniformity in taxation" only has merit within each
    class, not among them. The ideas that we should tax all income
    uniformly, or all property uniformly, have no merit from an
    efficiency standpoint.
    
    Many State constitutions are perverse in this regard, allowing
    discrimination among uses of land, but not between land and
    capital.\[27\]

2.  Taxing capital is non-neutral *per se*.
    
    Heavy taxation of capital in an open jurisdiction will abort
    marginal investments and thus lower the intensity of all land use.
    It will thus distort the allocation of capital among jurisdictions,
    driving it away from the taxing jurisdiction, generally to its
    disadvantage. It will also favour less intensive land uses within
    the taxing jurisdiction. The effect of a property tax based on the
    value of capital is the same as a rise in the rate of interest. The
    rule is, "If a tax varies with the use to which land is put, it is
    biased for the use more lightly taxed."
    
    Putting it in substitution terms, taxing capital induces
    substituting land for capital. This occurs simply because capital is
    taxed, however, and not because it is taxed more than land. It
    occurs whether land is taxed at a higher rate, the same rate, or no
    rate at all.
    
    For neutrality, the rule then is to avoid taxing anything except
    land. Non-uniform taxation is necessary to avoid taxing capital, and
    thus to avoid non-neutrality. The ordinary argument for uniformity
    gets it backwards.

3.  It is impossible to tax capital uniformly.
    
    The points (a) and (b) are the stronger because capital is never
    taxed uniformly anyway, and cannot be. No jurisdiction even tries to
    include personal consumer durables in the tax base, notably
    excepting cars in some states. Most states exempt all personal
    property; some exempt large parts of it. Personal property is
    concealable, movable before assessment dates, and generally
    impossible to treat uniformly. Exempting all personal property is no
    solution: it opens a wide bias against things bolted to the floor,
    as well as against floors themselves, and walls and roofs.
    
    The only way to tax capital uniformly is to exempt it all. The way
    to exempt it all, without going completely anarchist, is to raise
    the rate on land, which can be assessed uniformly.

4.  It is impossible and undesirable to tax consumption uniformly.
    
    What are pushed today as taxes on "consumption" exempt land
    consumption. Sales taxes and VATs in practice tax many things in
    cascade, and others not at all. They bear on capital formation in
    human form, and exempt consumption of land’s time-slots. To call
    them what they are, they are taxes on exchange, and the necessities
    of the poor, the middling, and parents of all levels struggling to
    create and maintain human capital.

# B-7. Land values are hypersensitive to discount rates

The sensitivity of present values to discount rates increases as the
value being discounted is further in the future. Land values are
discounted from more remote future values than are values of most
capital, even most durable and "fixed" capital. Consider land yielding
an expected constant cash flow: let the interest rate double and the
present value is halved. Compare the present value of a steer to be
slaughtered in one year: let the interest rate double from 5% to 10% and
the present value drops from .95 of slaughter value to .91.\[28\] Even
that overstates it a lot because we haven’t accounted for the feed bill,
but never mind, the point should be clear.

Let buyers expect land’s cash flow to rise annually by a growth
coefficient, G, and the valuation formula is cash flow divided by the
interest rate minus the growth rate (I-G), rather than I alone. Now let
the interest rate double, and the present value is cut to less than
half.

Or let land be yielding a nominal current cash flow and to be held in
anticipation of a higher use to begin 10 years down the road, and thirty
years after that to be renewed for an even higher use. Let there be a
whiff of oil, or the floating value of a shopping centre, or the
possible extension of a freeway and a new water supply paid by others.
Let there be a fear (or hope) that Washington will debauch the currency
sometime again in this century, or that another Howard Jarvis will cut
land taxes some more, or that future building costs will fall: any and
all of these, which are common and familiar expectations, make present
values of land more sensitive to discount rates than in the simple basic
capitalization model which is based on assumed constant cash flow in
perpetuity.

Expectations like those denoted above by G, or like the anticipated
higher future use referred to, are "a state of the public mind" (Richard
Hurd, *Principles of City Land Values*). They are incapable of proof or
disproof in the present and, whether proven true or false in the future,
will have lost relevance, to be replaced by new expectations of new
futures that unfold endlessly as time passes.

# B-8. Land markets are dominated by access to long-term credit

Individual bidding power is hypersensitive to one’s Internal Interest
Rate (IIR). This follows from B-7.

1.  Financing purchase ranges from difficult to impossible.
    
    Few assets are priced so high as land, relative to cash flow.
    Financing a purchase of land therefore presents an unusually high
    credit barrier to the builder, new businessman or hopeful homeowner.
    Cash flow is seldom adequate to cover interest on a full loan, let
    alone the principal. The buyer must find the excess elsewhere. A
    poor credit rating raises the interest rate and increases the
    difficulties. Even a middling credit rating is not good enough to
    open entry to most businesses, and a weak one excludes a large
    minority from homeownership.

2.  Land purchase is not self-liquidating.
    
    Because market agents expect land to last forever they price it
    accordingly, high enough so the net cash flow just covers interest
    on the price, with nothing left over to pay for the principal. Thus
    the land buyer will never normally (or "in equilibrium") pay for it
    from its own cash flow, as he will pay for capital assets. The
    debtor will never retire the loan from the cash flow of the land,
    but only from other saving, or from new windfalls not expected at
    time of purchase. A new buyer with no equity, therefore, is a bad
    credit risk and gets short shrift at the bank.

3.  The corollary of high land price is high carrying cost relative to
    cash flow.
    
    Carrying cost is interest on the price of land. It varies with one’s
    internal interest rate (IIR). For those with high lIRs, the carrying
    cost of land normally exceeds cash flow. Otherwise put, cash flow
    from land seldom covers carrying cost, while cash flow from
    depreciable capital covers more than its carrying cost because it
    normally has to be priced low enough for cash flow to cover both
    interest and depreciation. As to inventories of rising assets like
    steers or timber, they are like zero-coupon bonds: there is no cash
    flow before sale, but the famine leads to a feast of total recovery.
    
    Since land lasts forever while demands for land grow, the normal
    expectation over long periods is that ground rents will rise.
    Present land value includes the discounted values of expected higher
    future rents. This makes current land values very high relative to
    current cash flows, which are less than expected future flows. In
    stock market terms, the Price-earnings ratio of land is high, like
    that of a growth stock. This is more than an analogy, since a large
    share of the assets of corporations consist of land. In the USA,
    corporations are the major landholders.

4.  Credit barriers are barriers to equimarginal allocation of land.
    
    Those of poor credit ratings are peculiarly handicapped in the
    market for land titles. This is because the carrying cost of land is
    interest, and because there is a structure of interest rates based
    on borrowers' credit ratings.
    
    Because of the difference in carrying cost the financially strong
    add land to their holdings to a lower margin of productivity than
    prevails on holdings of the financially weak, whether we measure
    productivity in cash flow or service flow. This is a factor
    independent of and in addition to the fact that the financially
    strong likely place a higher current value on service flows (i.e.
    the amenities of land) of given objective quality.
    
    It is often reinforced in practice, too, by the greater political
    power that accompanies financial strength. The combination of
    factors may lead the land market far away from anything approaching
    an efficient equimarginal allocation of land among competing firms
    and households, to such a degree that traditional micro theory loses
    much of its explanatory power and the market becomes a travesty of
    the Platonic ideal in the textbook.

# B-9. Control of land gravitates to financially "strong hands"

1.  Landownership accretes around existing nuclei.
    
    Few people can invest heavily in an asset of high price and deferred
    yields. Those who can do so have a field with fewer competitors than
    most, and tend to expand widely. As a rustic Nebraska land economist
    twanged to me and others 30 years ago, "When a rancher buys these
    days it ain’t the quarters roundin' out, it’s the sections gobblin'
    the quarters."\[29\]
    
    One reason for that is that land is the basis for extending credit.
    The "sections" go to the banks for accommodation to buy the
    "quarters." As Prof. Rainer Schikele, the former Chief Economist of
    the FAO, wrote, "The basis of credit is not marginal productivity,
    but collateral security."
    
    A major factor giving one a good credit rating is the prior
    ownership of land. Thus, those already holding title to land have
    access to more land at a lower carrying cost than those trying to
    enter the market from poverty. The result is a tendency for land to
    agglomerate in the hands of the financially strong (cf. B-8).
    
    Just why some should want to expand so much as to be "alone in the
    midst of the earth" has puzzled many more gentler souls than Isaiah.
    Thorstein Veblen never turned his acidic irony to better account
    than in his last book, *Absentee Ownership*, describing acquisition
    for acquisition’s sake:
    
    > Subtraction is the aim of this pioneer cupidity, not production;
    > …​ being in no way related quantitatively to a person’s
    > workmanlike powers or to his tangible performance, it has no
    > 'saturation point'.
    > 
    > "Their passion for acquisition has driven them …​ ; their slavery
    > has been not to an imperative bent of workmanship and human
    > service, but to an indefinitely extensible cupidity …​\[which\] is
    > one of those 'higher wants of man' which the economists have found
    > to be 'indefinitely extensible', and like other spiritual needs it
    > is self-authenticating, its own voucher.
    > 
    > "The Latin phrase is *auri sacra\[30\] fames* (fanatical lust for
    > gold), …​ They \[the Romans\] had reached a realization of the
    > essentially sacramental virtue of this indefinitely extensible
    > need of more; …​ The object of this 'higher want of man' is no
    > longer \[gold\], but some form of \[certificate\] which conveys
    > title to a run of free income; and it can accordingly have no
    > 'saturation point', even in fancy, inasmuch as \[certificates of
    > title are\] also indefinitely extensible and stand in no
    > quantitative relation to tangible fact…​.
    > 
    > "They have always, …​ wanted something more than their …​ share of
    > the soil; not because they were driven by a felt need of doing
    > more than their fair share of work …​, but with a view to
    > …​getting a little something for nothing in allowing their
    > holdings to be turned to account, …​"
    > 
    > —  T. Veblen Absentee Ownsership 
    
    As Veblen taught, what is true of Nebraska sections and quarters is
    equally true of giant and small world corporations. The worldwide
    mergermania of the insatiable '80s followed the same pattern.
    Beneath the corporate veil, most corporations are large collections
    of real estate: industrial, commercial, agricultural, mineral,
    transportation, communications, and utility real estate.

2.  It follows that landownership is highly concentrated.
    
    Land is a major basis, probably the major basis of the concentration
    of wealth. Political distribution, if egalitarian, may stave this
    off for a considerable time. There is also evidence that heavy land
    taxation, where that is applied, motivates subdivision. However,
    experience is that, in the absence of heavy taxation, the surplus of
    rent attracts absentee investors, and large concentrations
    reconstitute themselves inexorably. The writer and others have
    documented such concentration elsewhere.\[31\]
    
    What concentration means for bargaining power has been foreshadowed
    in B-3. What it means for market power is treated in B-11.

# B-10. Land markets are sticky

Land sellers, compared to sellers of other factors, are too weakly
motivated to make very efficient markets. In the basic sense, the land
market is efficient if it guides land to its highest and best use,
yielding the most economic rent. Time was when that would go without
saying, but the semantic cleansing of theory has muddled it up. I do not
use "efficient market" in the tautological sense of some
rational-expectations theorists, wherein markets are efficient almost by
definition because all agents are assumed to know what they are doing,
and outside observers are not allowed to question it. Neither do I use
efficient in the arbitrage sense, where a land market is called
efficient if individual buyers of land make a reasonable return compared
with their alternatives.\[32\] I am looking at basic social efficiency.
There are many reasons why land markets fail.

1.  Weak seller motivation.
    
    The services of land perish with time. This is a strong social
    reason for seeing that land is well used. It is also a private
    motivation which makes the market work, such as it does. If we
    looked only at this factor in isolation, we would infer that land
    markets work well.
    
    Land is similar in this respect to capital. But capital also suffers
    from depreciation, obsolescence, spoilage, theft, and vandalism, and
    requires outlays for maintenance, protection, insurance and storage.
    Labour services also perish with time, when labour is unemployed;
    but unemployed labour also starves. Thus seller motivation is much
    higher for labour and capital than for land.

2.  Waiting for Godot.
    
    Some of land’s current service flow may be put into storage, for
    example if the land is growing timber or young fruit trees. In this,
    land is not unique. The service flow of the capital in the trees is
    similarly "plowed back" into the growing capital.
    
    But the flow of land service may also be stored in a way peculiar to
    itself. Landholders may defer permanent improvements while land
    "ripens" into a higher use, higher enough to repay with interest the
    loss of one or more years' rent flow.
    
    Strenuous efforts are made by some economic theorists to rationalize
    land withholding on these grounds. "Rational expectations" theorists
    have developed a paradigm wherein any investment decision is
    presumed rational and socially benign, to know all is to forgive
    all, and the burden of proof is on anyone who questions an
    individual landowner’s behaviour. Whether that kind of
    rationalization will long succeed, or whether widespread "holding
    for the rise" will again be recognized as evidence of market
    failure, there is no doubt that it occurs on a grand scale, and much
    land is thus held back from current use.\[33\]
    
    Withholding is also rationalized as waiting for greater certainty.
    This involves a fairly transparent fallacy of composition (although
    it seems to be opaque to those economists who make much of this
    point). The waiting landholder imposes uncertainty on others who are
    waiting to see what he will do, and of course vice versa, such that
    uncertainty motivates waiting, and waiting generates more
    uncertainty, in a vicious "positive feedback loop".
    
    Waiting landholders collectively also impose costs on the public,
    which has at the very least a prior investment in national
    appropriation and defence of the land, and usually heavy investments
    in public infrastructure which await private response. It is a
    situation where the gains of waiting accrue to the private
    landholder but the costs accrue to others, a clear condition for
    market failure.

3.  Limited competition.
    
    There is no new supply of land, as there is of capital due to
    current capital formation (cf. A-3). It was for this reason that
    Adam Smith and other classical economists called landholding a
    "monopoly". They did not mean there was just one owner or seller,
    but referred to the absence and impossibility of new supplies. They
    referred to a return, rent, in excess of costs needed to induce
    production. They referred to the fact that entry of competitors is
    limited to the holders of the given supply. Some moderns belittle
    the classicals for using monopoly in a different sense than what has
    become customary long after their funerals, but such an anachronism
    is patently unfair. They knew what they were saying.
    
    Land rent is not wiped out by competition. Instead, it is imputed
    away, silently disappearing into "Fixed Cost". Higher demand for
    land in general evokes no supply response: rather, it simply raises
    the whole structure of rents. There is usually increased supply of
    the gross produce or service from land owing to more intensive use,
    but it comes from the same land. The additional output results from
    increments of labour and capital applied to the same land. Cf B-4.

4.  Lags in reallocation. There is a sort of supply response to
    increased demand for one use of land, and reduced demand for
    another, because land use can be changed in response to a new
    structure of rents. Many micro theorists, focusing narrowly on
    economics as "the allocation of limited resources among competing
    ends," advance this to aver that land is as mobile as capital.
    However, reallocating land has tight limits. It is uncommonly slow
    because land is mostly committed to existing uses, encumbered with
    durable capital specialized to the existing use, and as yet not
    fully depreciated. Only a fraction of the potential change occurs in
    one year. In addition, potential reallocation is often limited by
    the spatial fixity or other qualitative peculiarity of specific
    lands. Tundra and Alpine meadow cannot be converted to the barns and
    warm climate of the corn belt; Utica cannot move to Manhattan, nor
    Death Valley to Newport Beach. The essence of land value is
    location; it is not easily duplicated, and of course totally
    stationary, by definition.
    
    The most favourable case for supply response is where the growing
    use is of high value and the shrinking one of no value, as with a
    city growing out into a desert. Here the change of land use is even
    tantamount to increasing the aggregate supply, it is said or implied
    by some Chicago School theorists.
    
    One problem with such a model is that deserts do not spawn great
    cities: even Denver, Phoenix, Albuquerque, Salt Lake City and Los
    Angeles all developed in oases of intensive farming. As cities
    spread they destroy part of what they serve and what serves them,
    and the reverberations ripple out vastly. Land boundaries are common
    and interdependent, so a change in one ecotone entails "repacking"
    entire regions, a long, sticky, disruptive process indeed. Expanding
    cities send out shock waves into the surrounding farms that travel
    through the entire hierarchy of farm land uses, as higher uses
    displace lower uses, from market gardens down to sheep grazing. Even
    grazing is not the lowest use: it then pushes on forestry and
    recreation where it finally meets the wrath of the Sierra Club (with
    headquarters in downtown San Francisco and offices in Washington,
    D.C.). Growing cities also destroy part of the natural beauty that
    many people value so highly that they devote their lives to
    protecting it.

5.  Lack of homogeneous land.
    
    Las Vegas, not a typical city, is the largest I know of that indeed
    grows in worthless desert. Here another factor stands out clearly:
    new lands are peripheral and only imperfect, partial substitutes for
    central land. The city must range farther for water, power, waste
    disposal, raw materials and markets.
    
    The high marginal cost of adding to spreading cities, and the low
    true net value of the additions, are concealed, in our culture, by
    an elaborate and pervasive system of subsidies and cross-subsidies
    built into our institutions and political power structures. These
    drain the old centres to feed the fringes. In a systemwide
    accounting we find the true social cost of urban sprawl as we know
    it today to exceed the gains at the margins. We are not so much
    adding land to cities as wasting capital, dissipating central rents
    to do it. Thus the private rent gradient and resulting land-value
    gradient that we observe in the marketplace is much flatter than the
    true gradient that is hidden under the subsidies. Even so, the
    visible gradient remains impressive: values rise to $2,000/psf in
    San Francisco, Chicago and Manhattan, and $25,000/psf in Tokyo.
    
    Land of rare and limited qualities is often the basis of market
    control: retail sites, rights-of-way, rare ores, water rights, are
    familiar examples. Even land of less rare qualities is often used
    for market control. American farm output is controlled by means of
    acreage limitations; Texas and now OPEC oil production by oil well
    allocation of quotas based on oil reserves; and so on.

6.  Lack of turnover.
    
    Now consider the market for land titles. This is the more relevant
    market for the construction industry, transfering land between uses,
    and changing parcel sizes. If the market for land services is slow,
    the market for land titles is viscous. There is no flow of supply,
    none at all. There is no real turnover in the sense of producing and
    using up. There is only ownership turnover: the market only
    transfers existing titles.\[34\] (There is a supplemental market in
    long leases, not addressed here.)
    
    There are few highly motivated sellers comparable to sellers of
    spoiling produce and obsolescing computers and vehicles. Median
    home-owners are motivated, when for occupational reasons they have
    to transfer to another region. Few other land sellers come close to
    that degree of motivation (and the median home represents more
    capital than land). Capital depreciates; goods spoil and obsolesce;
    idle labour starves; but land silently rises in value.
    
    The aggregate of all land changes hands slowly, with one or two
    percent turnover of ownership annually (measuring the stock by
    value, not number of parcels — smaller, cheaper parcels turn
    faster). But buyers often need adjacent land, or land in particular
    districts or with particular qualities, and find little or no land
    on the market, or land controlled by one seller.
    
    The slow ownership turnover cited above applies to total real
    estate, i.e. land including any buildings on it. Ownership turnover
    is even slower for bare land. If the average building lasts 50
    years, only 2% of the land is available for re-use in any given
    year. Only a fraction of that 2% is for sale; the rest is renewed by
    the same owner. Whoever wants to buy available land in any
    particular area is unlikely to be faced with the "many sellers"
    premised by the competitive model.

7.  Hoarding for vertical integration.
    
    A common precaution against sticky markets is buying excess land for
    possible future expansion. This behaviour makes markets that much
    more sticky. It is one of those things that necessitates and
    justifies itself, considered in the aggregate: it is
    self-aggravating and self-authenticating. When anyone buys and holds
    for his own future expansion, everyone has to: it is a positive
    feedback loop of possessiveness run wild.
    
    The composite result of individuals buying for future contingent
    need is that the market in raw land is turned to glue. It ceases to
    serve the median person in time of need. The effect is a species of
    vertical integration and, like all vertical integration, it destroys
    the free market in raw materials and vastly inflates the aggregate
    need for holding raw materials. This is because the pooling effect
    that is otherwise provided by the market is neutralized. For
    example, the grocer obtains, stores and keeps a wide variety of food
    and sundries on tap for thousands of customers. Lacking a grocer,
    each customer would have to maintain her own stores, and the
    aggregate required would far exceed that in the common grocery
    store. A good land market would likewise keep land on tap for the
    contingent needs of all, greatly lowering aggregate needs.

8.  Assembly.
    
    In certain ecotones (zones of change of land use) the technical need
    is to assemble small parcels into larger ones, as where commerce,
    industry and high rise are moving into a district of single homes on
    small lots. This condition maximizes market failure. It normally
    takes years to assemble an optimal parcel: one holdout can spoil
    years of negotiating and financing.
    
    Straw buyers and front men are used to keep principals and their
    intentions secret. Speculators are everywhere, trying to assemble
    large plots or hold up other buyers. Whole districts are held by
    anonymous absentees; buildings deteriorate, neighbourhoods lose
    their natural leaders and stabilizers, and communities disintegrate
    leaving slums and blight, crime and arson, public charges and
    vandalism.
    
    The sum of those factors makes for an inefficient market in land
    titles. Everyone who can tries to acquire land for his own future
    expansion. Timely subdivision may be foregone in anticipation of
    future assembly problems, skipping an entire generation of optimal
    land use. Neighbours adjusting lot lines have only each other to
    deal with. Aggregate landownership is highly concentrated because of
    the small numbers who can invest for deferred yields; the number of
    sellers in one district or for one use is more narrowly limited
    because of spatial immobility and low turnover and impossibility of
    new land creation. Financing is especially difficult because the
    asset is not self-liquidating. Many holders are waiting for the
    rise, and/ or for greater certainty to be provided by the advance
    commitments of others who are in turn waiting for them. Net result:
    wasted, underutilized land.

9.  Institutional stickiness.
    
    Land is traditionally subject to a host of legal and customary
    limits on use and ownership. Covenants are found in land titles:
    seldom in titles to cars or canned goods. Divided ownership is
    common, there is so much in the bundle we call land that can be
    owned separately. There are easements through, air rights over,
    mineral rights under, and neighbours and zoning all around any
    parcel of land. Changing lot lines is unavoidably a social process,
    there is no other way.
    
    A large share of the more valuable land in cities is held by
    estates. Public and non-profit holders are preferentially tax exempt
    and often without any visible motive to economize. Water licenses
    are held subject to "use it or lose it" traditions leading to
    appalling waste. Broadcasting/telecasting licenses are highly
    political. And so on. Only a resource with the characteristics of
    land could be subject to such a wide range of noneconomic pressures.

# B-11. Land is a major basis of market power

We have seen that landownership conveys superior bargaining power,
accretes around existing nuclei (B-9,a), and is highly concentrated
(B-9,b). We have seen markets are sticky. It follows that landownership
is a natural basis of market power.

1.  Expansion is zero-sum.
    
    Amassing land is always done, can only be done, by shrinking the
    holdings of others. To expand is to preempt. If A is to have more
    then B, C, D *et al*. must have less, there is no other way. A can
    amass more capital by saving, creating new capital, leaving B, C, D
    *et al*. with as much as before. A can increase his labour income by
    working longer, or harder, or smarter, producing more, leaving
    others with as much as before. He and she together can also spawn
    more children: labour, like capital, is reproducible, and
    indefinitely augmentable. Possessing land, however, means just one
    thing: displacing others.
    
    In the region of the mind, the thing possessed may be shared by all
    with no diminution to anyone. No one’s pleasure in Shakespeare, or
    Beethoven, or understanding physics is any less because at the same
    time millions of others have the same pleasure. Art, letters and
    science are the common property of mankind, open to all who care to
    acquire them. The creative producer’s pleasure is in proportion to
    the number with whom he shares. The gratification is from sharing,
    not excluding. The contrast with landholding is nearly total.\[35\]
    
    Amassing claims on wealth by creating and producing is not,
    therefore, a threat to others. Amassing capital through saving does
    not weaken or impoverish others. Producing goods does not interfere
    with others doing the same. One producer may drive another from a
    particular limited market, but glutting one market increases real
    demand for the products of other markets, and raises the real value
    of others' incomes by lowering prices. Amassing land, however, has
    to deprive others, both relatively and absolutely. Concentrated
    holding and control of land, therefore, have always been threats to
    the well-being of those left out.
    
    Conversely, the only way the landless, e.g. in South Africa, can get
    land is from those who now have it. "Growth" is often advanced as
    the solution to maldistribution, injustice and poverty, but that is
    mere temporizing because land does not grow. When production and
    demand grow, land rents rise. Of land it is starkly true, "the
    problem is not production, but distribution". There is no
    production; only distribution.

2.  Land is a natural base for monopoly and monopsony.
    
    Massed control of land is the most natural base for monopolizing
    markets because land is limited. Buying land always does double
    duty: when A expands he *ipso facto* preempts opportunities from B.
    For example, a chain of service stations with most of the best
    corners in a town has market power, the more so if it also holds a
    large share of oil sources, of refinery sites, of "offset rights" to
    pollute air, transmission rights of way, harbour sites, and other
    such limited lands.
    
    Preemption is not always just a by-product of expansion; it may be
    the main point of a business strategy. For example, in 1993
    Builders' Emporium, a large chain of California hardware stores with
    large parking lots in good locations, closed down and sold out. The
    sites were bought up by a grocery chain. According to news reports,
    the stores remain empty today; the land idle. The purpose is to keep
    the sites from Ralph’s, a competing grocery chain.
    
    The social purpose and rationale for private property and land
    markets is to get land into its best use. When preemption overrides
    use, market failure is total; private property is discredited.

3.  The differentiation of land is permanent.
    
    If monopoly were based simply on owning a particular form of
    capital, all the other capital in the world could be converted into
    the monopolized form each time it is liquidated and the proceeds are
    reinvested. The same is not true of land, whose specialized
    qualities are permanent (see A-3 and B-10).
    
    Land with differentiated special qualities is fixed, e.g. land in
    the City of London; or land suitable for growing macadamia nuts, or
    unloading ocean vessels, or relaying radio signals; or residential
    land within a superior high school district, or with ocean views and
    breezes. Substitution is generally possible but only at higher
    costs, resulting in rent gradients out from the best locations. This
    phenomenon is well studied and associated with the names of Von
    Thünen, Ricardo, and many modern location theorists.
    
    This quality makes land a natural basis for oligopoly control of
    markets, or attempts at control. Land bearing certain minerals, like
    diamonds or oil, is fixed and limited, in spite of new discoveries
    and technologies. Sites most suitable for refining oil are limited:
    they must be near markets, with access to cheap water transport and
    pipelines, with "offset rights" to pollute air, with "ancient
    rights" to endanger or downgrade surrounding residential lands and
    occasionally spill oil, with access to rails and a freeway system
    and a labour pool, with vast backlots for tank farms, inside
    supportive political jurisdictions, and so on.
    
    The fixity of land also lends itself to stability of association
    among oligopolists. People come and go; capital turns over, flows in
    and out; corporations, partnerships and syndicates are collapsed,
    merged, refinanced, bankrupted and reorganized. Land remains: it is
    always in the same place, unmistakeably identifiable and findable.
    It is the permanent, underlying resource whose control is always the
    objective of the shuffling and agitating and strife above it. Its
    owners, whoever they may be, will reliably join and support the
    local employers' association and their respective trade
    associations.

4.  Local market power.
    
    Tip O’Neil, the former Speaker of the US Congress, was often quoted
    that "All politics is local politics." One might say the same of
    market power. Some lands are sold or leased with covenants against
    competition, as Gimbel’s Department Store holds a covenant on a lot
    adjoining its parent store on 3rd Street and Wisconsin Avenue,
    Milwaukee. Such anticompetitive arrangements, however blatant, are
    intra-state, and apparently immune from sanctions under US Federal
    anti-trust laws. Scholars of industrial organization, many of them
    doing outstanding work otherwise, pay these grass-roots matters
    little heed. Researchers and activists concentrate on commodity
    markets at national and world levels - the ones subject to Federal
    sanctions, such as they are. They could probably find more severe
    and blatant market failure in local land markets.
    
    Bargaining power increases with the number of options one has. A
    large landowner with a chain of holdings in different jurisdictions
    is positioned to bargain, to play off one against the other. Thus,
    the Disney Corporation, 1991-93, considered rebuilding and expanding
    Disneyland at its current site in Anaheim, or in Long Beach where it
    had tenure over another suitable site. Using this leverage it won
    concessions from both cities, "finally" choosing to expand in
    Anaheim.
    
    Likewise, land is a basis for oligopsony power in local labour
    markets. A city’s labour pool is often faced with a local employers'
    association whose membership is limited by the amount of industrial
    land within reach of the labour pool. Migrant farm labour is faced
    with statewide employers' associations who have the advantages of
    limited numbers, wealth, ancient roots and stability. Labour unions
    that organize a local plant are faced with the threat of the
    "runaway shop", or merely reallocating work among plants, when the
    employer owns plants elsewhere.
    
    Custom has dulled us to it, but a corporation is a pool of separate
    individual landowners bargaining in concert. A century ago,
    corporations and limited liability were viewed with suspicion and
    apprehension. Today, hundreds and thousands of separate landowners
    pool their corporate strength against labour as a matter of course.
    Some employees bargain through unions, but not as a matter of
    course, and hardly ever with international options. In the US, less
    than 20% of the labour force is unionized, yet many, probably most
    economists treat labour as the only threatening monopoly. They see
    corporations as benign; a prime cause carried by many economists
    today is to eliminate the corporate income tax completely. Would we
    saw such support for eliminating the payroll tax, the most obvious
    cause of unemployment.

5.  Land is the basis of cartels.
    
    There is too much farmland to permit monopoly control through
    private action. However, production controls are exerted through
    public action and force of law. These controls operate through
    control of land, by limiting the allowable acreage in certain crops.
    Seldom is there any attempt to control other farming inputs like
    labour, fertilizer, farm capital or pesticides.
    
    The best-known world cartel, OPEC, also works through control of a
    natural resource. It is important in its own right, obviously, but
    only one of a whole genus that it represents so conspicuously. There
    is a tendency for cartels to overexpand under the price umbrella
    they support, and then collapse, taking with them a lot of wasted
    capital. The effect of short-run monopoly may thus be long-run
    instability (cf. B-17). Either way, the effects are harmful and
    impoverishing.

6.  Land puts the lock on monopoly.
    
    A monopoly that limits output to raise price, or a monopsony that
    limits hiring, both throw workers on the street, and release other
    resources too. Why do not these workers and these raw materials
    combine in new firms? The monopoly would defeat itself if they
    could. Clearly the monopoly must dominate. Land is the most likely
    one, because of limited supply and nonreproduceability. Somehow,
    ordinary micro "price theory" never addresses this question.\[36\]
    It is crippled by the absence of one leg: land.

# B-12. Land income is much greater than the current cash flow

1.  Appreciation is current income.
    
    The income of depreciable capital is cash flow less depreciation.
    The income of appreciable land is cash flow plus appreciation. That
    is quite a difference.
    
    With land held for appreciation there is no cash flow to disclose
    the high values and the steady accrual of gains in wealth. This
    quality of "silent accrual" is found in land surrounding cities, or
    growing retail centres, as well as in land considered potentially
    mineral-bearing. Other land is valued for expected higher future
    cash flows in its present use, or some higher use to come. Some land
    is valued for future "plottage" increments from assembly, or
    "negative plottage" from subdividing.
    
    Professors Haig and Simons have given their names to the standard
    definition of income which includes unrealized appreciation of
    durable assets like land and corporate shares as current income.
    Stock brokers and real estate brokers habitually do the same thing
    for the trade. They may appear to question it when lobbying for tax
    breaks, at which time some say it is "double taxation" to tax both
    current cash flow and appreciation. When selling stock or real
    estate, however, unrealized appreciation is unequivocally touted as
    current income, and correctly so.
    
    Some even deny that appreciation should be taxable income at all.
    Yet, no one denies that depreciation should be a deduction from
    current taxable income. This asymmetry and glaring contradiction
    generally passes unremarked. It could only survive if never
    challenged in the profession, which apparently it is not. "Land,"
    with its tendency to appreciate, is not in the abridged lexicon.

2.  Landowning yields large non-cash service flows.
    
    Land income also includes service flows other than cash. Because of
    its versatility, and fundamental character, land often yields
    service flows in kind that never pass through the market place. For
    example, land used for homes and owner-recreation yields no cash
    flow at all, but has high value.
    
    It is common for economists to write of the "imputed income of
    durable consumer capital", especially owner-occupied houses, and
    occasionally to persuade some political candidate to advocate
    including their imputed income in the income tax base, or at least
    to end the deduction of interest and property taxes paid on house
    values. Those making such proposals, unfortunately, fail to exercise
    reasonable care in distinguishing houses from land. Much or most of
    the non-cash service flow received from consumer capital proper is
    not income at all, but two other things: a return from operation,
    maintenance, and upkeep; and a return of capital. Depreciation and
    expenses offset more than half the service flow from most
    owner-occupied houses, especially middle-aged buildings on the steep
    slope of the depreciation curve. The service flow from land, on the
    other hand, is pure income.
    
    The measure of this imputed land income is not subjective nor fuzzy.
    It is interest on the market price of the land, a measure of its
    opportunity cost (cf. B-14 and A-2). Alternatively, it is the
    periodic ground rent on comparable lands. This could easily be
    included in the base of the present income tax, converting it in one
    stroke into a national land tax.\[37\]
    
    Forest land yields cash only once in decades. Some land is valued
    mainly for ancillary benefits like the preferential access it gives
    to adjoining lands for grazing, recreation, water rights, waste
    disposal, information gleaned from mining, etc. Other land is held
    for its contingency value, for example for possible future
    expansion. Some is held preemptively to freeze out competition, and
    some is used (under current US income tax laws) to yield non-cash
    tax shelter benefits.
    
    Part of farmland value is an amenity, especially of course in
    pleasant places. The value of lands held for the owner’s
    recreational pleasure is noncash. Part of the value of media
    ownership — especially through control of the radio spectrum — is
    power and prestige. Business sites in Newport Beach give access to
    water recreation; in Cambridge, Mass., to intellectual stimulus and
    hobnobbing. The list of non-cash service flows from land is much
    longer. The 15th Earl of Derby put it like this in 1881:
    
    > The objects which men aim at when they become possessed of land in
    > the British Isles may, I think, be enumerated as follows: (1)
    > political influence; (2) social importance, founded on territorial
    > possession, the most visible and unmistakable form of wealth; (3)
    > power exercised over tenantry; the pleasure of managing, directing
    > and improving the estate itself (4) residential enjoyment,
    > including what is called sport; (5) the money return — the rent.
    
    In Ireland, during rent wars, boycotts, etc., landlords "had long
    decided that Ireland would yield few of the spiritual delights of
    land ownership." This resulted in lower prices for Irish than
    English land.\[38\]

3.  Land income is a prior claim, not a "residual." Cf. A-14.

4.  Land income is a large share of national income.
    
    Throughout history the prime business of national governments has
    been to gain and keep land, mainly by force and threats (cf. B-1).
    The prime business of politics has been to apportion lands among the
    winners. A third business is then to subsidize them in various ways.
    It is most inconsistent, then, when the winners of all three battles
    counter tax proposals by pleading poverty, saying their land has
    little value. How little value it has may be gauged by playing "what
    if?" What if the English, with all their capital, were removed to
    Antarctica? What would be their national income?
    
    Less drastically, we might just ask what the owners would sell
    England for? A common way to trivialize land values is to play "what
    if' the owners tried to sell it all at once.\[39\] What if, instead,
    we went to buy it all? Much of it has been off the market for
    centuries, with reservation prices effectively infinite. More
    generally, this question is addressed in detail in my contribution
    to a sequel in this series, *Private Property and Public Finance*.

# B-13. Consuming land means pre-empting its time

To consume most goods and services is to use them up. Land is not used
up. "Consuming" land must have some other meaning, therefore, than the
intuitive and common idea that consuming means turning-to-waste. To
consume land is rather to preempt its service flow without impairing its
substance. To consume land is to occupy it for a time-slot, which may be
as brief as beating a red light or (rarely) as long as the pyramids
last.\[40\] After us life goes on, on the land once left to us which we
then leave to others. "Time-sharing" was not invented by the holiday
industry but is inherent in the nature of land and life.

How shall we measure land-consumption by owners, where no rent is paid?
Is it purely subjective? Does it vary with the owner’s mood and health?
It is simpler than that, and fully practicable. The essence of consuming
land is preempting the time-slot from others. Thus, holding land without
using it, or using it below capacity, is a form of consumption. The
measure is the market opportunity cost of land, i.e. the price times the
interest rate.

Holding an urban site has been likened to holding a reserved seat at a
play, sporting event, or concert. The ticketholder properly helps pay
for the event, whether or not he is there to enjoy it. As a result, very
few paid customers fail to show up. Likewise, people who pay cash rent
for land seldom leave it vacant. Doubtless if people paid regular cash
taxes to hold land, they, too, would consume (preempt) less.

Proponents of "consumer taxation" almost universally overlook this
point. I am not aware of one who has proposed including land-consumption
in the tax base. Aaron and Galper, propounding a "cash-flow tax,"
explicitly allow for letting each succeeding owner to write off the
purchase of land as a cost of production, effectively exempting land
rents from taxation 100%.

Theirs, and other proposals, and consumer taxes actually imposed now and
in the past, bear heavily on the necessities of median families. We
deride the salt tax of the French ancien régime, and of pre-Ghandian
India. We recognize them as instruments of tyranny and class warfare,
even as we tolerate modern legislators who impose comparable burdens on
ourselves and economists who rationalize such taxes by belittling the
necessities of life.

Doing so, they compound the deception in the label "consumer taxation".
Much of what is taxed in the name of taxing consumers is actually used
for capital formation: human capital formation. The same economists who
say human beings are or contain capital, turn around and tell us to tax
the formation and maintenance of such capital, by calling it
"consumption". Coupling this with their proposed exemption of
land-consumption we have the ultimate victory and application of
semantic cleansing. Inconstancy, thy name is neo-classical economist?

# B-14. Land’s rent is its opportunity cost, regardless of use

This means land rent is a much larger share of national income than
national accounts presently show.

Land income is a prior claim to the joint product of combined resources.
As noted in B-13, to consume land economically is merely to preempt a
time-slot from others, regardless of what one does with it. The unreaped
harvests of idle land flow like water wasting through a desert into a
salt sea. Lost water may sometimes be useful downstream; lost time never
returns. To keep others from using a time-slot is to consume it.

A great deal of land in fact is not allocated to its highest and best
use. The value of preempting this land is the highest and best use that
might have been made of the land preempted. That is the economic cost.
The land is not responsible if the manager fails to realize its value at
optimal capacity. Neither are the persons who are excluded. Only the
preemptor is responsible, as a manager. This person is the residual
imputee who deserves credit for performing above par and blame for
falling below.

Most economic theorizing has failed to bring out this point. The
tendency is to treat ground rent as a residual, a waste basket for all
the errors and dereliction of responsible economic actors. Too many
economists who make much of "choice" and "opportunity cost", fail to
apply that properly to land, when estimating its value. This has
resulted in greatly understating the value of land relative to other
factors of production. Institutional and social factors, too, often
obscure the opportunity cost of land.

This is a case where theorizing lags behind practice. In dividing value
between land and a building affixed to it the standard practice of
appraisers, and speculative buyers too, is the "building-residual
method." The land is appraised as though vacant; the building gets the
remaining value, if any. The building, once attached to a specific site,
loses the mobility of place and form that fluid capital possesses and
has no opportunity cost but scrap value, which is often negative. Land,
always lacking mobility of place, retains mobility of reuse because of
its versatility, permanence, and irreproduceable location.

# B-15. Land value is hypersensitive to the environment

Because of fixed location land value reflects its surroundings. Good and
bad spillover values lodge in land rents because they are locational and
the affected land cannot escape the bad, nor avoid sharing the good.

# C-1. Land value is used as the basis of credit and money

During a land boom, financial institutions lend freely on land. After a
while, mortgages secured by real estate (either directly or through the
corporate veil) become the major asset of banks. Credit follows
collateral, and then helps boost its collateral value in a positive
feedback loop. In periods of high and rising land prices, borrowers get
used to pledging land to secure loans, and lenders get used to demanding
it.

The credit is often used to buy still more land, to reserve for possible
future use and at the same time to withhold from competitors. Such
concentration and market control form the ugly side of extant western
"capitalism", when enterprise degenerates into greed and acquisitions
supplant innovations.

The basis of credit is not marginal productivity but collateral
security. Lenders are concerned not with the productive use of their
loans, but with the security provided by borrowers' ownership of old
wealth.\[41\]

As Keynes put it in his General Theory, there are two kinds of risks:
investment risk proper, and lender’s risk. Investment risk depends on
the productivity of new capital; "lenders' risk" depends on borrowers'
old collateral, like land. The social purpose of investing is to create
capital; the individual purpose is to buy income with security. The
second purpose leads lenders to lend to the rich in preference to those
who are productive. The principles are at odds; the productivity
principle is clearly better from the viewpoint of basic micro
efficiency.

The marginal productivity basis of lending is also better in terms of
macro stability. Flows of credit dominated by cycles in the land market
are highly unstable. The savings and loan industry calamity in the US in
the 1980s exemplifies and should settle the point. It has many
precedents, going back at least to the golden age of Florentine banking,
the Dutch Tulip Bubble of 1634 and the French-English Mississippi and
South Sea Bubbles of 1720. The rule has been that following each
collapse the hungover lenders woke up penitent. Reacting to the excesses
they adopted something like the English Banking School philosophy of
avoiding real estate loans and sticking with self-liquidating commercial
loans, only to fall off the wagon in the next land boom thereby helping
to repeat the cycle. How easily one generation forgets the hard lessons
life taught the one before. "When will they ever learn?"\[42\]

# C-2. Land valuation is subjective

The value of durable capital is based on expected future cash flow, and
so is that of land, but there are at least three big differences. The
future of most capital is short; that of land is infinite. The future of
most capital is limited to the specialized use for which it was built;
that of land is varied and unpredictable. The future cash flow of
capital is limited by potential competition from new capital with a
known cost of production; that from land is limited only by future
demand and is likely to rise. It is "a state of the public mind"
(Richard Hurd).

As to allocation of land it gravitates not just to the financially
strong but to the psychologically susceptible, that is those most prone
to overestimate future incomes, for whatever reason.

There is too little in objective reality to limit expectations. Many
buyers have little understanding of valuation theory. Loan officers
should be better trained than naive new buyers, but the recent history
of US and Japanese banking suggests otherwise. Without understanding,
there is little basis for pricing other than the behaviour of other
buyers and sellers, i.e. the rest of the herd. By then valuation is
purely circular and loses its anchor in reality. The history of land
values, accordingly, is one of manic-depressive mob psychology with
swings of high amplitude.

Suppose one decides to consult a professional real estate appraiser, to
make sure he does not overbid. What do appraisers do? They locate
comparable properties that have sold recently, and advise you
accordingly.

The buyers of those other properties hired appraisers who did the same
thing. If there is a building it is different. Your valuer tells you it
is not worth more than its reproduction cost, a known figure in the
trade. With land, however, value is based mainly on what others are
paying, i.e. the general opinion. Everyone is setting his watch by
everyone else’s.

There is one important party whose following of the herd will actually
restrain the herd, and temper its excesses. This party is the assessor
of land taxes. If land assessments rise with a herd mania, land taxes
will also rise, which dashes freezing water on the mania and stabilizes
the market. Here is compensatory fiscal policy in the best and original
sense. This can really work. It did work in the Progressive Era,
1900-17, when reliance on property taxes was at an all-time high in the
US. The major crash that was "due" in 1913 or so never happened. Several
factors were at work, but this was clearly a major one.\[43\]

# C-3. Land markets are prime causes of instability

1.  Land prices move in cycles of high amplitude.

2.  Investors respond to high land-price by forming land-saving capital,
    i.e. substituting capital for land. It is useful to distinguish five
    forms this substitution takes (cf. A-6, where these points are
    outlined).
    
    1.  Land-saving capital, like high buildings. Land-saving comprises
        intensification of use of previously rentable lands, or
        "exploiting the intensive margin of production".
    
    2.  Land-enhancing capital, meaning capital used to improve land for
        a new, higher use. This includes bringing marginal land into
        production, on remote frontiers. However, that is only a small
        part of what it means. Both country and city are marked by many
        edges or ecotones where lower uses give way to higher
        uses.\[44\] Each is an economic frontier. Thus, land enhancing
        also means converting rangeland to plowland, dryland to
        irrigated land, irrigated pasture to horticulture, and furrow
        irrigation to drip irrigation. In urban growth, it means
        converting farmland or wasteland to dwelling units, low-density
        estates to subdivisions, single-family detached units to garden
        apartments, garden apartments to high-rise apartments,
        residential to commercial, and obsolete structures to modern
        ones.
        
        Developing submarginal land is particularly capital-intensive,
        and the payoff is notably slow. A generic example is reforesting
        land that is high, cold, dry and sloping, where the timber does
        not ripen for over a century.
    
    3.  Land-linking capital, like canals and rails and city streets.
    
    4.  Land-capturing (rent-seeking) capital, like squatters'
        improvements, and canal and rail lines built to secure land
        grants, and dams and canals built to secure water rights. These
        land-seizing investments are never optimal for society, and they
        always waste capital. Land-seizing investments are laid out by
        self-seeking individuals ("rational economic agents") with no
        expectation of ever recovering the capital invested because the
        payoff comes as title to land, which never wears out. Canal,
        rail, traction, water supply, freeway and other such promoters
        are always mainly in the business of selling lands.
    
    5.  Rent-leading capital. In urban growth, an example is
        over-improving land today, expecting higher demand tomorrow.
        This is "forcing the future". It occurs because there are
        "economies of simultaneity" in building. It is hardly ever
        economical to add stories to buildings one at a time. If you are
        going to build to four stories, you have to do it all at once.
        Suppose today’s demand is high enough to justify a two-storey
        building, but you see the demand rising steadily over the
        60-year life of the building. You build a four-storey building
        today, and absorb early losses on the upper two stories, as an
        investment for future years. A city builds a four-lane street,
        where two would do today, anticipating higher future usage. It
        puts excess capacity in its water and sewer lines, for future
        growth. Such examples are legion.
        
        Economies of simultaneity are related to economies of scale.
        Building higher, taken by itself, suffers diseconomies, also
        known as increasing costs. On the other hand, building larger,
        with horizontal expansion, evinces economies of scale. It also
        requires more land, meaning more land rent. It comes into style
        during periods of rent-leading capital building.
        
        In a speculative land boom, land prices go prematurely high.
        Premature high land values profoundly distort the character of
        capital investment. High land prices stimulate land-saving,
        land-enhancing and land-linking investments. This is a rational
        economic response when and if the market is sending the right
        signals. Ideally, an optimally high level of land rents and
        values serves as a community synchronizer, causing everyone to
        build as though others were going to build complementarily in
        synchronised fashion.
        
        However, in the frenzy of a speculative boom the market sends
        the wrong signals. Land is peculiarly subject to irrational
        speculative pricing in booms because of its subjective pricing -
        see B-16. Overpricing of land reserves land for two contrasting
        kinds of buyers and holders.
        
        Type A buyers would "force the future" with "rent-leading"
        buildings. They plan to and do develop land for a future demand
        higher than present demand. In Chicago, 1835, this was
        exemplified by building four-storey buildings outside The Loop
        (the city centre). Overpricing and consequent over-improvement
        gets greater, the further out you go.
        
        When that demand fails to materialize, Type A buyers cannot
        recover their money. They cannot rent out all their floor space,
        if that is what they built. Or they cannot use the full capacity
        of their tannery, harbour, shipyard, sawmill, packing plant,
        soap factory, brickyard, or whatever they overbuilt.
        
        When Type A buyers develop land beyond the reach of existing
        infrastructure, they force extensions of same which are often
        losers, but they are cross-subsidized by the whole system.
        
        Type B landowners just hold land unused or underused. Rather
        than force the future, they would free-ride on the future. They
        are usually looking or expecting to sell for a rise. Type B-1 is
        the aggressive outside buyer, the stereotypical "land
        speculator" who does this calculatingly, cold-heartedly, as a
        purely pecuniary investment. Type B-2 is the ancient owner whose
        land just happens to lie in the way of growth. Type B-2 owners
        are sympathetic figures in popular drama and sentiment. They are
        passive victims of change, clinging to old values against
        mechanistic, impersonal, exogenous, amoral, modernizing forces.
        However, their market behaviour has much the same economic
        consequences as that of Type B-1. Many turn out to be
        ambivalent, resisting change for a few years while quietly
        expecting to sell out for the highest price for their
        retirement.
        
        The land of Type B landowners absorbs no capital directly, but
        much capital indirectly, by forcing the stretching-out of all
        land-linking investments in space, and generating no traffic or
        use to justify those that are built to and past them. Empty land
        also generates no synergistic spillover gains to raise the cash
        flow of surrounding, complementary lands. Thus it helps freeze
        capital sunk in improving them.

3.  Land-saving capital is well above average in durability.
    
    Following an argument developed by Smith, Ricardo, Mill, Wicksell,
    Spiethoff, Hayek, and others, an excess commitment of capital to
    fixed forms with slow recovery rates brings on a shortage of
    job-making investing. See the summary in Haberler, *Prosperity and
    Depression*.

# Summary

In summary, we have reviewed the primary reasons why economic theory
should treat land as a distinctive factor of production; and the
practical inferences therefrom. Making land markets, land policy, and
land taxation work well for the general welfare is a major challenge for
economists and statesmen. They have neglected it for too long by
swallowing the peculiar neo-classical sophisms that would obscure or
deny all distinctions between land and capital.

# Bibliography

## 

Aaron, Henry, and Harvey Galper, *Assessing Tax Reform*. Washington: The
Brookings Institution, 1985.

Boehm-Bawerk, Eugen, 1907. *Quarterly Journal of Economics*, vol. xxi/2.

Bradford, David, *et al*., 1992. 'Tax Incidence in New Jersey' *National
Tax Journal*, December.

California Commission on Immigration and Housing. 1919. *Large
Landholdings in Southern California (A Report on), with
Recommendations*. Sacramento: California State Printing Office.

Carver, Thomas N., 1915. *Essays in Social Justice*. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.

Clark, J.B., 1893. 'The Genesis of Capital' *Yale Review*, Nov.,
pp.302-15.

Clarke, J.B., 1907. 'Concerning the nature of capital: a reply to Dr
Eugen von Boehm-Bawerk' *Quarterly Journal of Economics*, v.2 1, pp. 35
1-70, May. Transi. to German by dr. Josef Schumpeter. *Zeitschrfift fur
Volkerwirtschaft*, v. 16, pp. 426-40, 1907.

Douglas, Roy, 1976, *Land People & Politics: the Land Question in the
UK., 1878-1952*. London: Allison and Busby.

Feder, Kris, 1993. 'Land Speculation and Land Value Taxation'
Dissertation, Temple University.

Fellmeth, Robert (ed.), 1971. *Power and Land in California.*
Washington: Center for Study of Responsive Law.

Felimeth, Robert, 1973. *Politics of Land*. NY: Grossman Publishers, pp.
3-25, 163-80.

Gaffney, Mason, 1961. 'The Unwieldy Time-dimension of Space' AJES2O(5):
465-81. October.

Gaffney, Mason, 1962. 'Land and Rent in Welfare Economics' in Marion
Clawson, Marshall Harriss and Joseph Ackermanm (eds.) *Land Economics
Research*. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press. Pp. 141-67.

Gaffney, Mason, 1965. 'Soil Depletion and Land Rent' *Natural Resources
Journal* 4(3):537-57.

Gaffney, Mason, 1967. *Extractive Resources and Taxation*. Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press.

Gaffhey, Mason, 1970. 'Adequacy of Land as a Tax Base' in Daniel Holland
(ed.), *The Assessment of land Value*. Madison: Univ. of Wisconsin
Press, pp. 157-2 12.

Gaffney, Mason, 1971. 'The Property Tax is a Progressive Tax,
*Proceedings, NTA*, 64th Annual Conference, Kansas City, 1971,
pp.408-26.

Gaffhey, Mason, 1992. 'The Taxable Surplus in Water Resources'
*Contemporary Policy Issues*.

Gaffney, Mason, 1992. 'Rising Inequality and Falling Property Tax Rates'
Chapter 10 in Gene Wunderlich (ed.), *Ownership, Tenure, and Taxation of
Agricultural Land*. Boulder: Westview Press.

Gaffney, Mason, 1993. 'The Taxable Capacity ofLand' Proceedings,
Conference on Land Value Taxation for New York State, January, 1993.
Albany, New York: The Government Law Center, Albany Law School.

Gaffney, Mason, 1993. 'Whose Water? Ours' in Polly Dyer (ed.), *Whose
Water?* Seattle: The University of Washington.

Gaffney, Mason, 1993. 'Who Owns Southern California?' Notes on
concentration of landholdings, 1988 (revised, March 1990; May 10, 1991;
Oct 24, 1993).

Gates, Paul, 1978. 'California Land Policy and its Historical Context:
the Henry George Era' Institute of Governmental Studies, *Four
Persistent Issues*.

Berkeley: University of California, pp 1-30.

George, Henry, 1871. *Our Land and Land Policy*. Rpt. New York:
Schalkenbach Foundation.

Goodall, Merrill, 1991. 'Property and Water Institutions in California'
Draft, pp. 1-18, available from author, Claremont Graduate School,
Claremont, California.

Gottlieb, Robert, and Irene Wolt, 1977. *Thinking Big*. New York:
Putnam, pp. 500-09.

Gottlieb, Robert, and Peter Wiley, 1982. *Empires in the Sun*. New York:
Putnam.

Gottlieb, Robert 1988. *A Life of its Own*. New York: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich, Publishers.

Greider, William, 1992. *Who Shall Tell the People?* New York: Simon and
Schuster.

Haberler, Gottfried, 1937. *Prosperity and Depression*. Geneva: The
League of Nations, pp. 70-75 (summary of Spiethoff, q.v.)

Hayek, Friedrich A.v., 1935-36. 'The Mythology of Capital' Rpt. in
Fellner, William, and Bernard Haley (eds.), 1951, *Readings in the
Theory of Income Distribution*. Selected by a Committee ofthe American
Economic Assoiciation. Philadelphia: The Blakiston Co., pp.355-83.

Henry, John, 1994. Book-length manuscript on J.B.Clark.

Hurd, Richard, 1902. *Principles of City Land Values*. New York: Record
and Guide.

Knight, Frank H., 1946. 'Capital and Interest' *Encyclopedia
Brittanica*, Rpt. in Feliner, William, and Bernard Haley (eds.), 1951,
*Readings in the Theory of Income Distribution*. Selected by a Committee
of the American Economic Association. Philadelphia: The Blakiston Co.,
pp. 384-417.

Knight, Frank H. 1924, rpt. 1952. 'Some Fallacies in the Interpretation
of Social Cost' in Stigler, George, and Kenneth Boulding (eds.),
*Readings in Price Theory*, Selected by a Committee of the American
Economic Association. Chicago: R.D. Irwin.

Knight, Frank H. 193 1-36, six articles cited in Hayek, q.v., p 355.

Lutz, Friedrich, and Vera Smith Lutz, 1951. *Theory of Investment of the
Firm*. Princeton University Press. Rpt. New York: Greenwood Press, 1969,
pp 10912

Marshall, Alfred, 1920, rpt. 1947. *Principles of Economics*. 8th ed.
London: Macmillan.

McWilliams, Carey, 1939. 'Land Monopolization' Chap.2, *Factories in the
Field*, Boston: Little, Brown and Co., pp.11-27.

Mill, J.S., 1848. *Principles of Political Economy*. Book IV, chap.III,
'Influence of the Progress of Industry and Population on Rents, Profits,
and Wages' Article 4.

Mints Lloyd, 1945. *A History of Banking Theory*. Chicago: Univ. of
Chicago Press.

Montgomery, Robert H., 1940. *The Brimstone Game*, New York: The
Vanguard Press.

Myers, W.I., 1920. *An Economic Study of Farm Layout*. Ithaca: Cornell
University Press.

Roberts, Polly, 1971. 'Power and Land in California' A summary of the
Nader Report chaired by Robert Fellmeth, 1971.

Roberts, Warren, 1967. 'Mine Taxation in Developing Countries' in
Gaffney, Mason (ed.), *Extractive Resources and Taxation*. Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press.

Rosenbaum, David E., 1994. 'IRS Eludes Parking Tax Law' *New York Times
News Service*. Riverside, California: The Press-Enterprise, 24 February,
p.A12.

Schikele, Rainer, 1942, 'Obstacles to Agricultural Production Expansion'
*Journal of Farm Economics* 24:447-62.

Shannon, H.L., and H.M.Bodfish, 1929. 'Increments in Land Values in
Chicago' *Journal of Land and Public Utility Economics* 5:29-47.

Sinclair, Upton, 1923. *The Goose Step, A Study of American Education*.
Pasadena: Published by the author. Wholesale Distributors, The Economy
Book Shop, 33 South Clark St., Chicago.

Spahr, Charles B., 1891. 'The Single Tax' *Political Science Quarterly*
6:625-34.

Spiethoff, Arthur, 1925. 'Krisen' *Handworterbuch des
Staatswissenschaften*, 4th ed., Jena, vol VI, 70-86.

*The Press-Enterprise*, Riverside, 1993. 'Vons buys Builders' Emporium
Stores', 15 October, p. C-7.

Tideman, T. Nicolaus, 1982. 'A tax on Land Value is Neutral' *National
Tax Journal* 35:109-11.

Triffin, Robert, 1940. *Monopolistic Competition and General Equilibrium
Theory*. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

US Census of Agriculture, 1987, pp.1 6, 36, 84, 120.

US Department of the Interior, Bureau of Reclamation, 1946.
*Landownership Survey on Federal Reclamation Projects*. Washington:
USGPO

Veblen, Thorstein, 1923. *Absentee Ownership*. New York: B.W.Huebsch.

Villarejo, Don, 1986. *How much is Enough? Federal Water Subsidies and
Agriculture in California’s Central Valley*. Davis: California Institute
for Rural Studies, Inc.

Wicksell, Knut, 1938. *Lectures on Political Economy*, trans. E.
Classen., New York: The Macmillan Co.

Wicksell, Knut, 1954. *Value, Capital, and Rent*, trans. S.H. Frowein.
London: G.Allen & Unwin

Wieser, Friedrich von, 1888, trans. 1893. *Natural Value*. C.A. Malloch
(trans.) London: Macmillan and Co.

Wilson, Edwin, and Marion Clawson, 1945. *Agricultural Land Ownership
and Operation in the Southern San Joaquin Valley*. Berkeley: USDA,
Bureau of Agricultural Economics.

Worsteer, Donald, 1985, *Rivers of Empire*. New York: Pantheon Books,
pp. 98111,243-47, 291-302.

1.  Land is absolutely limitational. Capital is nearly so in practice:
    we need not dwell on rare cases to the contrary.

2.  Careers both inside and outside academia are much influenced by
    "deep lobbying," as described by William Greider, 1992, *Who Shall
    Tell the People*?, pp.42-59. "Deep lobbying" is targeting publiO
    opinion several years in the future, by building allies in think
    tanks, academia, the media, and select activist groups. Greider
    gives as an example the effort of polluting interests to undo the
    Superfund law. They chose The Conservation Foundation, engineering
    the selection of William. K. Reilly as environmental czar. Greider
    emphasizes the role of economists, et at., as hired guns. The
    eagerness of many college professors and administrators to get
    grants at any price must be experienced to be believed, but I can
    attest from personal observation that it drives much of the
    profession and its attitudes.

3.  So help me, in 1993 I saw and heard a one-factor model
    presentesolemnity. Labour was the one factor. Other economists
    attending saw nothing wrong: they gravely admired the model’s
    "elegance."

4.  See any standard text in micro-economics. It would be invidious to
    pick on any one.

5.  Most of the Austrians themselves treated of caput reference to land,
    as though trees grew floating in space. Two notable exceptions were
    Wieser, and the "Swedish Austrian" Knut Wicksell.

6.  It is ironic that economists purport or affect to ape the methods of
    physics, when they delete bothspace and time from their subject. If
    they have borrowed from physics, they have taken the form without
    the substance.

7.  "Something there is that does not love a wall, that sends the frozen
    groundswell under it, and spills the upper boulders in the sun."
    Robert Frost, "Mending Wall."

8.  M. Gaffney, 1994, "The Taxable Capacity of Land." Albany Law School.

9.  M. Gaffney, 1967, Extractive Resources and Taxation. Madison:
    University of Wisconsin Press. M. Gaffney, 1965, "Soil Depletion and
    Land Rent," National Resources Journal 4(3):537-57.

10. An example on a social scale is the bonding imposed on nuclear
    generators by the US Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC).
    FERC requires utility firms to set aside a percentage of their fuel
    budget in a sinking fund to pay for "decommissioning" plants at the
    end of their economic lives.

11. The careful but captious reader is reminded that our unqualified
    indicatives refer to land as site. We have set aside extractive
    resources for special treatment (cf. n.10 above).

12. Some renewable land resources move: air, water, wild fish and game.
    The observations here need modifying or explicating to apply fully
    to them. Movable water, for example, springs from a watershed or
    aquifer that is fixed in space.

13. The Spanish terms for real estate are *bienes inmuebles* and *bienes
    raices* (rooted goods). French distinguishes land and capital:
    *immeubles* refers more to improvements and fixtures; *propriete
    fonciere* applies more specifically to pure land. German, too, has a
    separate term for improvements and fixtures, *unbewegliche Eigentum*
    (immovable property), while real estate is Grundeigentum, obviously
    stressing ground alone. In English the etymology may reveal the
    king’s underlying ownership: real estate probably springs from
    royal estate, "real" being either contracted from "regal," or
    borrowed from the French and Spanish real, royal. Spanish law does
    recognize "regalian" ownership of subsurface minerals. (In Latin
    American history this took the form of a 20% severance tax.) Our
    word "realize," meaning convert to money, likely derives from the
    fact that money was issued by kings and bore their imges. The
    Spanish real was a silver coin of wide currency. Spanish coin was
    the western world’s hard money for four centuries.

14. On the point, I recommend the writings of Knut Wicksell, e.g.
    *Value, Capital, and Rent*. After praising the works of
    Boehm-Bawerk, Wicksell faults him for treating capital simply as
    stored labour. Wicksell makes it also stored land, whose
    distinctiveness and importance he recognizes.

15. The Indians of America are loath to alienate tribal lands precisely
    to preclude improvident liquidation.

16. Clarke, J.B., 1899. *The Distribution of Wealth*, New York: an.
    Wickstead, Phillip, 1914. *The Scope and Method of Political
    Economy*. E.G. 24: 1-23.

17. A classic study of this matter is W.I. Myers, 1920, *An Economic
    Study of Farm Layout*. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. It is
    indicative of the later neglect of land economics that one must go
    back so far to find the classic.

18. A recent application of the Physiocratic law is by David Bradford,
    *et al*., *National Tax Journal*, Dec. 1992, applying it to New
    Jersey.

19. J.S. Mill, *Principles*, "Influence of the Progress of Industry and
    Population on Rents, Profits and Wages," Article 4.

20. An old limerick puts it well. "A captious economist planned to live
    without access to land. He nearly succeeded, but found that he
    needed food, water, and somewhere to stand."

21. It has been suggested that satellites and space stations work
    without land but of course they are launched and powered and
    controlled and supplied from the earth. Every one to date makes
    extensive use of the radio spectrum, a scarce bit of economic land.
    Even a dead satellite uses an orbit, and one of these days there
    will be interference — already there is talk of star wars, and the
    crowded skies. It has further been advanced that micro-chips and
    such use so little land that land is irrelevant. This overlooks that
    these items are made and assembled and used in plants that spread
    out and produce toxic wastes, by people who arrive in autos riding
    over rights-of-way from homes on residential lots. Land prices in
    Silicon Valley are so high, and space so tight, that plants long
    since began moving in search of cheaper land in Sonoma County,
    Sacramtento County, etc.

22. We do not address here to what extent "human capital" blurs the
    distinction of land and capital. We do note that economists who
    would "tax consumption" taxing the nuance of human capital, while
    exempting the consumption of land, are involved in massive
    contradictions.

23. It is also ignored by most of those who call themselves "Austrians"
    after the great Austrian economists of the 19th Century (although
    one of these, Wieser, made much of the difference between land and
    capital, and even Hayek criticized Frank Knight for seeking to
    obliterate any distinction).

24. Gene pools may remain distinctive over generations, partially
    limiting interchangeability. We will not try to settle here the
    perennial quarrel of heredity vs. environment.

25. This is heavily documented in M. Gaffney, *"Whose Water? Ours."*
    1922. In Polly Byer (ed.), *"Whose Water?"* Seattle: University of
    Washington, and in *"What price water marketing?"* Working Paper,
    Department of Economics, University of California, Riverside, Ca.

26. The question of public restrooms is unpleasant but essential. It is
    a question whether to describe this as access to public capital or
    to the waste-disposal aspect of land, but viewed as the latter it is
    as undeniable a natural right as one can imagine. The late Arthur
    Becker was one of the few to elevate this lowly, embarrassing topic
    from being a subject of evasive scatological humour to the
    philosophical/ethical level it really deserves. A society may
    quickly be read, and in part judged, by its public restrooms.
    Consider this jointly with the matter of the homeless in crowded
    cities.

27. It is most likely that these provisions were adopted consciously for
    the overt purpose of thwarting any popular movement towards high tax
    rates on property. There is no cap on land tax rates that may be
    borne without destructive incentive effects. These constitutional
    provisions in effect shelter land rents behind the incentive needs
    of building investors.

28. More accurately that is from 1/1.05 to 1/1.10.

29. For those unfamiliar with the American township survey system, a
    "section" is 640 acres or one square mile; a "quarter" is 160 acres.

30. The Latin *sacra* means either accursed or holy, the emphasis
    depending presumably on whether described by a critical observer or
    one possessed. "Fanatical" seems to capture the double-edged meaning
    being relished by Veblen. It should give pause to many modern
    economists with their weakness for treating self-interest as The
    Holy Spirit.

31. "Who Owns Southern California?"; "The Property Tax is a Progressive
    Tax"; "Adequacy of Land as a Tax Base"; Falling Property Tax Rates
    and Rising Concentration"; "Whose Water? Ours"; "The Taxable
    Capacity of Water Resources"; and other writings. Among other
    writers and sources cited are the following. Sources on earlier
    times include George, 1871; Gates, 1978; Large Landholdings, 1919;
    Worster, 1985, pp. 98-111; McWilliams, 1939). Sources on more recent
    times include Worster, 1985, pp. 243-47, 29 1-302; Villarejo, 1982;
    Roberts, 1971; Fellmeth, 1973, Pp. 3-25, 163-80; Gottlieb and Wolt,
    1977, pp. 500-509; Landownership Survey, 1946; Wilson and Clawson,
    1945; Goodall, 1991; US Census of Agriculture, 1987, pp.16, 36, 84,
    120.

32. This particular sophism may be traced back through Bodfish and
    Shannon to Charles Spahr.

33. See Kris Feder’s study in *Land Speculation and the Business Cycle*,
    another volume in this series, and Lutz and Lutz (1951).

34. New titles are created, too, but they only transfer land from common
    to tenured ownership. There is no real turnover of land.

35. Paraphrased from Upton Sinclair, 1923, *The Goose Step*.

36. Students of industrial organization are less inclined to sweep it
    under the rug, but have generally failed to give it the importance
    it deserves. A notable exception was the Texas institutionalist
    Professor Montgomery, author of *The Brimstone Game*, but where are
    the Montgomerys of today?

37. In 1992 the US Congress passed an energy policy law including a
    provision that the worker who receives a parking space from his or
    her employer must pay income taxes on its imputed value in excess
    of$ 155/month. The imputed value is simply what nearby or comparable
    space rents for. This imputed land rent becomes taxable income,
    beginning with 1994 taxes. (David E. Rosenbaum, 1994, "IRS eludes
    parking tax law." New York Times News Service. Riverside,
    California, *The Press-Enterprise*, 24 Feb., p. A- 12.)

38. "Ireland and the Land Act," *Nineteenth Century*, October 1881,
    p.474, cit. Roy Douglas, 1976, *Land People and Politics*. London:
    Alison and Busby, p.17.

39. Inconsistently, the very profession that accepts such trivialization
    is now advising Russia to do exactly that.

40. The other six "Wonders of the Ancient World" have all disappeared
    without a trace. Relative to land, human works are evanescent. "Like
    snow upon the desert’s dusty face, lighting a little hour or two"
    they are gone.

41. Rainer Schikele, 1942, "Obstacles to Agricultural Production
    Expansion," *Journal of Farm Economics* 24: 447-62. *In bello
    veritas*.

42. It would help if historians recorded the details more scrupulously
    and reminded the world more cogently. University of Chicago banking
    historians Lloyd Mints, Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz have done
    much to belittle and bury the matter completely, a tribute to their
    influence but not their sagacity. Friedman and Schwartz' history of
    banking came at the right time to fulfill the wishful thinking of a
    generation wanting to be free of the fear that something other than
    human error by a few Directors of the Federal Reserve Board brought
    on The Great Depression.

43. Unfortunately, assessors today are subject to strong political and
    social pressures to lag behind the market.

44. "Interfaces of supersession" is a polysyllabic equivalent used by
    land economists.
